Constructing and Interpreting Graphic
Displays of Behavioral Data

Key Terms
bar graph independent variable split-middle line of progress
cumulative record level Standard Celeration Chart
cumulative recorder line graph trend
data local response rate variability
data path overall response rate visual analysis
dependent variable scatterplot
graph semilogarithmic chart

Applied behavior analysts document and quan-
tify behavior change by direct and repeated
measurement of behavior. The product of these
measurements, called data, is the medium with which
behavior analysts work. In everyday usage the word data
refers to a wide variety of often imprecise and subjec-
tive information offered as facts. In scientific usage the
word data means “the results of measurement, usually
in quantified form” (Johnston & Pennypacker, 1993a,
p. 365).1
Because behavior change is a dynamic and ongoing
process, the behavior analyst—the practitioner and the
researcher—must maintain direct and continuous con-
tact with the behavior under investigation. The data ob-
tained throughout a behavior change program or a
research study are the means for that contact; they form
the empirical basis for every important decision: to con-
tinue with the present procedure, to try a different inter-
vention, or to reinstitute a previous condition. But making
valid and reliable decisions from the raw data themselves
(a series of numbers) is difficult, if not impossible, and in-
efficient. Inspecting a long row of numbers will reveal
only very large changes in performance, or no change at
all, and important features of behavior change can easily
be overlooked.
Consider the three sets of data that follow; each con-
sists of a series of numbers representing consecutive mea-
sures of some target behavior. The first data set shows the
results of successive measures of the number of responses
emitted under two different conditions (A and B):
Condition A Condition B
120, 125, 115, 130, 114, 110, 115, 121,
126, 130, 123, 120, 110, 116, 107, 120,
120, 127 115, 112
Here are some data showing consecutive measures of
the percentage of correct responses:
80, 82, 78, 85, 80, 90, 85, 85, 90, 92
The third data set consists of measures of responses
per minute of a target behavior obtained on successive
school days:
65, 72, 63, 60, 55, 68, 71, 65, 65, 62, 70, 75, 79, 63, 60
What do these numbers tell you? What conclusions
can you draw from each data set? How long did it take
you to reach your conclusions? How sure of them are
you? What if the data sets contained many more mea-
sures to interpret? How likely is it that others interested
in the behavior change program or research study would
reach the same conclusions? How could these data be di-
rectly and effectively communicated to others?
Graphs—relatively simple formats for visually dis-
playing relationships among and between a series of mea-
surements and relevant variables—help people “make
sense” of quantitative information. Graphs are the major
device with which applied behavior analysts organize,
store, interpret, and communicate the results of their work.
Figure 1 includes a graph for each of the three data sets
presented previously. The top graph reveals a lower level
of responding during Condition B than during Condi-
tion A. The middle graph clearly shows an upward trend
over time in the response measure. A variable pattern of
responding, characterized by an increasing trend during
the first part of each week and a decreasing trend toward
the end of each week, is evident in the bottom graph. The
graphs in Figure 1 illustrate three fundamental proper-
ties of behavior change over time—level, trend, and vari-
ability—each of which will be discussed in detail later in
the chapter. The graphic display of behavioral data has
proven an effective means of detecting, analyzing, and
communicating these aspects of behavior change.
Purpose and Benefits
of Graphic Displays
of Behavioral Data
Numerous authors have discussed the benefits of using
graphs as the primary vehicle for interpreting and com-
municating the results of behavioral treatments and re-
search (e.g., Baer, 1977; Johnston & Pennypacker, 1993a;
Michael, 1974; Parsonson, 2003; Parsonson & Baer,
1986, 1992; Sidman, 1960). Parsonson and Baer (1978)
said it best:
In essence, the function of the graph is to communicate,
in a readily assimilable and attractive manner, descrip-
tions and summaries of data that enable rapid and accu-
rate analysis of the facts. (p. 134)
There are at least six benefits of graphic display and
visual analysis of behavioral data. First, plotting each
measure of behavior on a graph right after the observa-
tional period provides the practitioner or researcher with
immediate access to an ongoing visual record of the par-
ticipant’s behavior. Instead of waiting until the investi-
gation or teaching program is completed, behavior change
is evaluated continually, allowing treatment and experi-
mental decisions to be responsive to the participant’s per-
formance. Graphs provide the “close, continual contact
with relevant outcome data” that can lead to “measurably
superior instruction” (Bushell & Baer, 1994, p. 9).
Second, direct and continual contact with the data in
a readily analyzable format enables the researcher as well
as the practitioner to explore interesting variations in be-
havior as they occur. Some of the most important research
findings about behavior have been made because scien-
tists followed the leads suggested by their data instead
of following predetermined experimental plans (Sidman,
1960, 1994; Skinner, 1956).
Third, graphs, like statistical analyses of behavior
change, are judgmental aids: devices that help the prac-
titioner or experimenter interpret the results of a study or
treatment (Michael, 1974). In contrast to the statistical
tests of inference used in group comparison research,
however, visual analysis of graphed data takes less time,
is relatively easy to learn, imposes no predetermined or
arbitrary level for determining the significance of be-
havior change, and does not require the data to conform
to certain mathematical properties or statistical assump-
tions to be analyzed.
Fourth, visual analysis is a conservative method for
determining the significance of behavior change. A be-
havior change deemed statistically significant according
to a test of mathematical probabilities may not look very
impressive when the data are plotted on a graph that re-
veals the range, variability, trends, and overlaps in the
data within and across experimental or treatment condi-
tions. Interventions that produce only weak or unstable
effects are not likely to be reported as important findings
in applied behavior analysis. Rather, weak or unstable
effects are likely to lead to further experimentation in an
effort to discover controlling variables that produce mean-
ingful behavior change in a reliable and sustained man-
ner. This screening out of weak variables in favor of
robust interventions has enabled applied behavior ana-
lysts to develop a useful technology of behavior change
(Baer, 1977).2
Fifth, graphs enable and encourage independent
judgments and interpretations of the meaning and sig-
nificance of behavior change. Instead of having to rely on
conclusions based on statistical manipulations of the data
or on an author’s interpretations, readers of published re-
ports of applied behavior analysis can (and should) con-
duct their own visual analysis of the data to form
independent conclusions.3
Sixth, in addition to their primary purpose of dis-
playing relationships between behavior change (or lack
thereof) and variables manipulated by the practitioner or
researcher, graphs can also be effective sources of feed-
back to the people whose behavior they represent (e.g.,
DeVries, Burnettte, & Redmon, 1991; Stack & Milan,
1993). Graphing one’s own performance has also been
demonstrated to be an effective intervention for a vari-
ety of academic and behavior change objectives (e.g.,
Fink & Carnine, 1975; Winette, Neale, & Grier, 1979).
Types of Graphs Used
in Applied Behavior Analysis
Visual formats for the graphic display of data most often
used in applied behavior analysis are line graphs, bar
graphs, cumulative records, semilogarithmic charts, and
scatterplots.

Line Graphs
The simple line graph, or frequency polygon, is the most
common graphic format for displaying data in applied
behavior analysis. The line graph is based on a Cartesian
plane, a two-dimensional area formed by the intersection
of two perpendicular lines. Any point within the plane
represents a specific relationship between the two di-
mensions described by the intersecting lines. In applied
behavior analysis, each point on a line graph shows the
level of some quantifiable dimension of the target be-
havior (i.e., the dependent variable) in relation to a spec-
ified point in time and/or environmental condition (i.e.,
the independent variable) in effect when the measure
was taken. Comparing points on the graph reveals the
presence and extent of changes in level, trend, and/or
variability within and across conditions.
Parts of a Basic Line Graph
Although graphs vary considerably in their final appear-
ance, all properly constructed line graphs share certain
elements. The basic parts of a simple line graph are shown
in Figure 2 and described in the following sections.
1. Horizontal Axis. The horizontal axis, also called
the x axis, or abscissa, is a straight horizontal line that
most often represents the passage of time and the pres-
ence, absence, and/or value of the independent variable.
A defining characteristic of applied behavior analysis is
the repeated measurement of behavior across time.
Time is also the unavoidable dimension in which all
manipulations of the independent variable occur. On
most line graphs the passage of time is marked in equal
intervals on the horizontal axis. In Figure 2 succes-
sive 10-minute sessions during which the number of
property destruction responses (including attempts) was
measured are marked on the horizontal axis. In this
study, 8 to 10 sessions were conducted per day (Fisher,
Lindauer, Alterson, & Thompson, 1998).
The horizontal axis on some graphs represents dif-
ferent values of the independent variable instead of time.
For example, Lalli, Mace, Livezey, and Kates (1998)
scaled the horizontal axis on one graph in their study
from less than 0.5 meters to 9.0 meters to show how the
occurrence of self-injurious behavior by a girl with severe
mental retardation decreased as the distance between the
therapist and the girl increased.
2. Vertical Axis. The vertical axis, also called the
y axis, or ordinate, is a vertical line drawn upward from
the left-hand end of the horizontal axis. The vertical axis
most often represents a range of values of the dependent
variable, which in applied behavior analysis is always
some quantifiable dimension of behavior. The intersec-
tion of the horizontal and vertical axes is called the
origin and usually, though not necessarily, represents
the zero value of the dependent variable. Each succes-
sive point upward on the vertical axis represents a
greater value of the dependent variable. The most com-
mon practice is to mark the vertical axis with an equal-
interval scale. On an equal-interval vertical axis equal
distances on the axis represent equal amounts of behav-
ior. The vertical axis in Figure 2 represents the number
of property destruction responses (and attempts) per
minute with a range of 0 to 4 responses per minute.
3. Condition Change Lines. Condition change lines
are vertical lines drawn upward from the horizontal
axis to show points in time at which changes in the in-
dependent variable occurred. The condition change
lines in Figure 2 coincide with the introduction or
withdrawal of an intervention the researchers called
blocking. Condition change lines can be drawn as solid
or dashed lines. When relatively minor changes occur
within an overall condition, dashed vertical lines should
be used to distinguish minor changes from major
changes in conditions, which are shown by solid lines
(see Figure 18).
the more confidence one can place in the story told by
the data path.
7. Figure Caption. The figure caption is a concise
statement that, in combination with the axis and condi-
tion labels, provides the reader with sufficient informa-
tion to identify the independent and dependent variables.
The figure caption should explain any symbols or ob-
served but unplanned events that may have affected the
dependent variable (see Figure 6) and point out and
clarify any potentially confusing features of the graph
(see Figure 7).
4. Condition Labels. Condition labels, in the form
of single words or brief descriptive phrases, are printed
along the top of the graph and parallel to the horizontal
axis. These labels identify the experimental conditions
(i.e., the presence, absence, or some value of the inde-
pendent variable) that are in effect during each phase of
the study.4
5. Data Points. Each data point on a graph repre-
sents two facts: (a) a quantifiable measure of the target
behavior recorded during a given observation period
and (b) the time and/or experimental conditions under
which that particular measurement was conducted.
Using two data points from Figure 2 as examples, we
can see that during Session 5, the last session of the
first baseline phase, property destruction and attempted
property destruction responses occurred at a rate of ap-
proximately 2 responses per minute; and in Session 9,
the fourth session of the first blocking phase, 0 in-
stances of the target behavior were recorded.
6. Data Path. Connecting successive data points
within a given condition with a straight line creates a
data path. The data path represents the level and trend
of behavior between successive data points, and it is a
primary focus of attention in the interpretation and
analysis of graphed data. Because behavior is rarely
observed and recorded continuously in applied behav-
ior analysis, the data path represents an estimate of the
actual course taken by the behavior during the time
elapsed between the two measures. The more mea-
surements and resultant data points per unit of time
(given an accurate observation and recording system),
4The terms condition and phase are related but not synonymous. Properly
used, condition indicates the environmental arrangements in effect at any
given time; phase refers to a period of time within a study or behavior-
change program. For example, the study shown in Figure 2 consisted of
two conditions (baseline and blocking) and six phases.
Variations of the Simple Line Graph:
Multiple Data Paths
The line graph is a remarkably versatile vehicle for dis-
playing behavior change. Whereas Figure 2 is an ex-
ample of the line graph in its simplest form (one data
path showing a series of successive measures of behav-
ior across time and experimental conditions) by the ad-
dition of multiple data paths, the line graph can display
more complex behavior–environment relations. Graphs
with multiple data paths are used frequently in applied
behavior analysis to show (a) two or more dimensions of
the same behavior, (b) two or more different behaviors,
(c) the same behavior under different and alternating ex-
perimental conditions, (d) changes in target behavior rel-
ative to the changing values of an independent variable,
and (e) the behavior of two or more participants.
Two or More Dimensions of the Same Behavior.
Showing multiple dimensions of the dependent variable
on the same graph enables visual analysis of the ab-
solute and relative effects of the independent variable
on those dimensions. Figure 3 shows the results of a
study of the effects of training three members of a
women’s college basketball team proper foul shooting
form (Kladopoulos & McComas, 2001). The data path
created by connecting the open triangle data points
shows changes in the percentage of foul shots executed
with the proper form, whereas the data path connecting
the solid data points reveals the percentage of foul shots
made. Had the experimenters recorded and graphed
only the players’ foul shooting form, they would not
have known whether any improvements in the target
behavior on which training was focused (correct foul
shooting form) coincided with improvements in the be-
havior by which the social significance of the study
would ultimately be judged—foul shooting accuracy.
By measuring and plotting both form and outcome on
the same graph, the experimenters were able to analyze
the effects of their treatment procedures on two critical
dimensions of the dependent variable.
Two or More Different Behaviors. Multiple data
paths are also used to facilitate the simultaneous com-
parison of the effects of experimental manipulations on
two or more different behaviors. Determining the co-
variation of two behaviors as a function of changes in
the independent variable is accomplished more easily if
both can be displayed on the same set of axes. Figure
4 shows the percentage of intervals in which a boy
with autism exhibited stereotypy (e.g., repetitive body
movements, rocking) across three conditions and the
number of times that he raised his hand for attention (in
the attention condition), signed for a break (in the de-
mand condition), and signed for access to preferred tan-
gible stimuli (in the no-attention condition) in a study
investigating a strategy called functional communica-
tion training (Kennedy, Meyer, Knowles, & Shukla,
2000).5 By recording and graphing both stereotypic re-
sponding and appropriate behavior, the investigators
were able to determine whether increases in alternative
communication responses (raising his hand and sign-
ing) were accompanied by reductions in stereotypy.
Note that a second vertical axis is used on Figure 4 to
show the proper dimensional units and scaling for sign-
ing frequency. Because of the differences in scale, read-
ers of dual-vertical axis graphs must view them with
care, particularly when assessing the magnitude of be-
havior change.
Measures of the Same Behavior under Different
Conditions. Multiple data paths are also used to repre-
sent measures of the same behavior taken under differ-
ent experimental conditions that alternate throughout
an experimental phase. Figure 5 shows the number of
self-injurious response per minute by a 6-year-old girl
with developmental disabilities under four different
conditions (Moore, Mueller, Dubard, Roberts, & Sterling-
Turner, 2002). Graphing an individual’s behavior under
multiple conditions on the same set of axes allows di-
rect visual comparisons of differences in absolute levels
of responding at any given time as well as relative
changes in performance over time.
Changing Values of an Independent Variable.
Multiple data path graphs are also used to show changes
in the target behavior (shown on one data path) relative
to changing values of the independent variable (repre-
sented by a second data path). In each of the two graphs
in Figure 6 one data path shows the duration of prob-
lem behavior (plotted against the left-hand y axis scaled
in seconds) relative to changes in noise level, which are
depicted by the second data path (plotted against the
right-hand y axis scaled in decibels) (McCord, Iwata,
Galensky, Ellingson, & Thomson, 2001).
The Same Behavior of Two or More Participants.
Multiple data paths are sometimes used to show the be-
havior of two or more participants on the same graph.
Depending on the levels and variability of the data
encompassed by each data path, a maximum of four dif-
ferent data paths can be displayed effectively on one set
of axes. However, there is no rule; Didden, Prinsen, and
Sigafoos displayed five data paths in a single display
(2000, p. 319). If too many data paths are displayed on the
same graph, the benefits of making additional compar-
isons may be outweighed by the distraction of too much
visual “noise.” When more than four data paths must be
included on the same graph, other methods of display
can be incorporated.6 For example, Gutowski and Stromer
(2003) effectively used striped and shaded bars in com-
bination with conventional data paths to display the num-
ber of names spoken and the percentage of correct
matching-to-sample responses by individuals with men-
tal retardation (see Figure 7).
Bar Graphs
The bar graph, or histogram, is a simple and versatile
format for graphically summarizing behavioral data. Like
the line graph, the bar graph is based on the Cartesian
plane and shares most of the line graph’s features with
one primary difference: The bar graph does not have dis-
tinct data points representing successive response mea-
sures through time. Bar graphs can take a wide variety of
forms to allow quick and easy comparisons of perfor-
mance across participants and/or conditions.
Bar graphs serve two major functions in applied be-
havior analysis. First, bar graphs are used for displaying
and comparing discrete sets of data that are not related to
one another by a common underlying dimension by
which the horizontal axis can be scaled. For example,
Gottschalk, Libby, and Graff (2000), in a study analyzing
the effects of establishing operations on preference as-
sessments, used bar graphs to show the percentage of tri-
als in which four children reached toward and picked up
different items (see Figure 8).
Another common use of bar graphs is to give a visual
summary of the performance of a participant or group
of participants during the different conditions of an ex-
periment. For example, Figure 9 shows the mean per-
centage of spelling worksheet items completed and the
mean percentage of completed items that were done cor-
rectly by four students during baseline and combined
generalization programming and maintenance conditions
that followed training each child how to recruit teacher
attention while they were working (Craft, Alber, &
Heward, 1998).
Bar graphs sacrifice the presentation of the variabil-
ity and trends in behavior (which are apparent in a line
graph) in exchange for the efficiency of summarizing and
comparing large amounts of data in a simple, easy-to-
interpret format. They should be viewed with the under-
standing that they may mask important variability in the
data. Although bar graphs are typically used to present a
measure of central tendency, such as the mean or median
score for each condition, the range of measures repre-
sented by the mean can also be incorporated into the dis-
play (e.g., see Figure 5 in Lerman, Kelley, Vorndran,
Kuhn, & LaRue, 2002).
Cumulative Records
The cumulative record (or graph) was developed by
Skinner as the primary means of data collection in the
experimental analysis of behavior. A device called the
cumulative recorder enables a subject to actually draw
its own graph (see Figure 10). In a book cataloging 6
years of experimental research on schedules of rein-
forcement, Ferster and Skinner (1957) described cumu-
lative records in the following manner:
A graph showing the number of responses on the ordi-
nate against time on the abscissa has proved to be the
most convenient representation of the behavior observed
in this research. Fortunately, such a “cumulative” record
may be made directly at the time of the experiment. The
record is raw data, but it also permits a direct inspection
of rate and changes in rate not possible when the behav-
ior is observed directly. . . . Each time the bird responds,
the pen moves one step across the paper. At the same
time, the paper feeds continuously. If the bird does not
respond at all, a horizontal line is drawn in the direction
of the paper feed. The faster the bird pecks, the steeper
the line. (p. 23)
When cumulative records are plotted by hand or cre-
ated with a computer graphing program, which is most
often the case in applied behavior analysis, the number of
responses recorded during each observation period is
added (thus the term cumulative) to the total number of
responses recorded during all previous observation peri-
ods. In a cumulative record the y axis value of any data
point represents the total number of responses recorded
since the beginning of data collection. The exception oc-
curs when the total number of responses has exceeded
the upper limit of the y axis scale, in which case the data
path on a cumulative curve resets to the 0 value of the
y axis and begins its ascent again. Cumulative records
are almost always used with frequency data, although
other dimensions of behavior, such as duration and la-
tency, can be displayed cumulatively.
Figure 11 is an example of a cumulative record
from the applied behavior analysis literature (Neef, Iwata,
& Page, 1980). It shows the cumulative number of
spelling words mastered by a person with mental retar-
dation during baseline and two training conditions. The
graph shows that the individual mastered a total of 1 word
during the 12 sessions of baseline (social praise for cor-
rect spelling responses and rewriting incorrectly spelled
words three times), a total of 22 words under the inter-
spersal condition (baseline procedures plus the presen-
tation of a previously learned word after each unknown
word), and a total of 11 words under the high-density re-
inforcement condition (baseline procedures plus social
praise given after each trial for task-related behaviors
such as paying attention and writing neatly).
In addition to the total number of responses recorded
at any given point in time, cumulative records show the
overall and local response rates. Rate is the number of
responses emitted per unit of time, usually reported as
responses per minute in applied behavior analysis. An
overall response rate is the average rate of response over
a given time period, such as during a specific session,
phase, or condition of an experiment. Overall rates are
calculated by dividing the total number of responses
recorded during the period by the number of observation
periods indicated on the horizontal axis. In Figure 11
the overall response rates are 0.46 and 0.23 words mas-
tered per session for the interspersal and high-density re-
inforcement conditions, respectively.7
On a cumulative record, the steeper the slope, the
higher the response rate. To produce a visual representa-
tion of an overall rate on a cumulative graph, the first and
last data points of a given series of observations should
be connected with a straight line. A straight line con-
necting Points a and c in Figure 11 would represent the
learner’s overall rate of mastering spelling words during
the interspersal condition. A straight line connecting
Points a and e represents the overall rate during the high-
density reinforcement condition. Relative rates of re-
sponse can be determined by visually comparing one
slope to another; the steeper the slope, the higher the rate
of response. A visual comparison of Slopes a–c and a–e
shows that the interspersal condition produced the higher
overall response rate.
Response rates often fluctuate within a given period.
The term local response rate refers to the rate of re-
sponse during periods of time smaller than that for which
an overall rate has been given. Over the last four ses-
sions of the study shown in Figure 11, the learner ex-
hibited a local rate of responding during interspersal
7Technically, Figure 11 does not represent true rates of response because
the number of words spelled correctly was measured and not the rate, or
speed, at which they were spelled. However, the slope of each data path rep-
resents the different ”rates” of mastering the spelling words in each session
within the context of a total of 10 new words presented per session.
training (Slope b–c) that was considerably higher than
his overall rate for that condition. At the same time his
performance during the final four sessions of the high-
density reinforcement condition (Slope d–e) shows a
lower local response rate than his overall rate for that
condition.
A legend giving the slopes of some representative
rates can aid considerably in the determination and com-
parison of relative response rates both within and across
cumulative curves plotted on the same set of axes (e.g.,
see Kennedy & Souza, 1995, Figure 2). However, very
high rates of responding are difficult to compare visually
with one another on cumulative records.
Although the rate of responding is directly proportional
to the slope of the curve, at slopes above 80 degrees
small differences in angle represent very large differ-
ences in rate; and although these can be measured ac-
curately, they cannot be evaluated easily by [visual]
inspection. (Ferster & Skinner, 1957, pp. 24–25)
Even though cumulative records derived from con-
tinuous recording are the most directly descriptive dis-
plays of behavioral data available, two other features of
behavior, in addition to the comparison of very high rates,
can be difficult to determine on some cumulative graphs.
One, although the total number of responses since data
collection began can be easily seen on a cumulative
graph, the number of responses recorded for any given
session can be hard to ascertain, given the number of data
points and the scaling of the vertical axis. Two, gradual
changes in slope from one rate to another can be hard to
detect on cumulative graphs.
Four situations in which a cumulative graph may be
preferable to a noncumulative line graph are as follows.
First, cumulative records are desirable when the total
number of responses made over time is important or when
progress toward a specific goal can be measured in cu-
mulative units of behavior. The number of new words
learned, dollars saved, or miles trained for an upcoming
marathon are examples. One look at the most recent data
point on the graph reveals the total amount of behavior up
to that point in time.
Second, a cumulative graph might also be more ef-
fective than noncumulative graphs when the graph is used
as a source of feedback for the participant. This is be-
cause both total progress and relative rate of performance
are easily detected by visual inspection (Weber, 2002).
Third, a cumulative record should be used when the
target behavior is one that can occur or not occur only
once per observation session. In these instances the ef-
fects of any intervention are easier to detect on a cumula-
tive graph than on a noncumulative graph. Figure 12
shows the same data plotted on a noncumulative graph
and a cumulative graph. The cumulative graph clearly
shows a relation between behavior and intervention,
whereas the noncumulative graph gives the visual im-
pression of greater variability in the data than really exists.
Fourth, cumulative records can “reveal the intricate
relations between behavior and environmental variables”
(Johnston & Pennypacker, 1993a, p. 317) Figure 13 is
an excellent example of how a cumulative graph enables
a detailed analysis of behavior change (Hanley, Iwata, &
Thompson, 2001). By plotting the data from single ses-
sions cumulatively by 10-second intervals, the researchers
revealed patterns of responding not shown by a graph of
session-by-session data. Comparing the data paths for
the three sessions for which the results were graphed cu-
mulatively (Mult #106, Mixed #107, and Mixed #112)
revealed two undesirable patterns of responding (in this
case, pushing a switch that operated a voice output device
that said “talk to me, please” as an alternative to self-
injurious behavior and aggression) that are likely to occur
during mixed schedules, and the benefits of including
schedule-correlated stimuli (Mult #106).
Semilogarithmic Charts
All of the graphs discussed so far have been equal-inter-
val graphs on which the distance between any two con-
secutive points on each axis is always the same. On the
x axis the distance between Session 1 and Session 2 is
equal to the distance between Session 11 and Session 12;
on the y axis, the distance between 10 and 20 responses
per minute is equal to the distance between 35 and 45 re-
sponses per minute. On an equal-interval graph equal ab-
solute changes in behavior, whether an increase or
decrease in performance, are expressed by equal distances
on the y axis.
Another way of looking at behavior change is to ex-
amine proportional or relative change. Logarithmic
scales are well suited to display and communicate pro-
portional change. On a logarithmic scale equal relative
changes in the variable being measured are represented
by equal distances. Because behavior is measured and
charted over time, which progresses in equal intervals,
the x axis is marked off in equal intervals and only the
y axis is scaled logarithmically. Hence, the term semi-
logarithmic chart refers to graphs in which only one
axis is scaled proportionally.
On semilog charts all behavior changes of equal pro-
portion are shown by equal vertical distances on the ver-
tical axis, regardless of the absolute values of those
changes. For example, a doubling of response rate from
4 to 8 per minute would appear on a semilogarithmic
chart as the same amount of change as a doubling of 50
to 100 responses per minute. Likewise, a decrease in re-
sponding from 75 to 50 responses per minute (a decrease
of one third) would occupy the same distance on the ver-
tical axis as a change from 12 to 8 responses per minute
(a decrease of one third).
Figure 14 shows the same data graphed on an
equal-interval chart (sometimes called arithmetic or add-
subtract charts) and on a semilogarithmic chart (some-
times called ratio or multiply-divide charts). The behavior
change that appears as an exponential curve on the arith-
metic chart is a straight line when plotted on the semilog
chart. The vertical axis in the semilog chart in Figure 14
is scaled by log-base-2 or X2 cycles, which means that
each cycle going up on the y axis represents a times-2 in-
crease (i.e., a doubling) of the cycle below it.
Standard Celeration Charts
In the 1960s, Ogden Lindsley developed the Standard
Celeration Chart to provide a standardized means of
charting and analyzing how frequency of behavior
changes over time (Lindsley, 1971; Pennypacker, Gutier-
rez & Lindsley, 2003). The Standard Celeration Chart is
a semilogarithmic chart with six X10 cycles on the ver-
tical axis that can accommodate response rates as low as
1 per 24 hours (0.000695 per minute) or as high as 1,000
per minute.
There are four standard charts, differentiated from one
another by the scaling on the horizontal axis: a daily chart
with 140 calendar days, a weekly chart, a monthly chart,
and a yearly chart. The daily chart shown in Figure 15
is used most often. Table 1 describes major parts of the
Standard Celeration Chart and basic charting conventions.
The size of the chart and the consistent scaling of the
y axis and x axis do not make the Standard Celeration
Chart standard, as is commonly believed. What makes
the Standard Celeration Chart standard is its consistent
display of celeration, a linear measure of frequency
change across time, a factor by which frequency multi-
plies or divides per unit of time. The terms acceleration
and deceleration are used to describe accelerating per-
formances or decelerating performances.
A line drawn from the bottom left corner to the top
right corner has a slope of 34° on all Standard Celera-
tion Charts. This slope has a celeration value of X2 (read
as “times-2”; celerations are expressed with multiples or
divisors). A X2 celeration is a doubling in frequency per
celeration period. The celeration period for the daily chart
is per week; it is per month for the weekly chart, per 6
months for the monthly chart, and per 5 years for the
yearly chart.
Table 1 Basic Charting Conventions for the Daily Standard Celeration Chart (See also Figure 15)
Term Definition Convention
1. Charted day A day on which the behavior is recorded and charted. 1. Chart the behavior frequency on the chart on
the appropriate day line.
2. Connect charted days except across phase
change lines, no chance days, and ignored days.
a) Acceleration target Responses of the performer intended frequency to accelerate.
Chart a dot (•) on the appropriate day line.
b) Deceleration target Responses of the performer intended frequency to decelerate.
Chart an (x) on the appropriate day line.
2. No chance day A day on which the behavior had no chance Skip day on daily chart.
to occur.
3. Ignored day A day on which the behavior could have occurred but no one recorded it. Skip day on daily chart. (Connect data across
ignored days.)
4. Counting-time bar (aka record floor) Designates on the chart the performer’s lowest possible performance (other than zero) in a counting time. Always designated as “once per counting time.”
Draw solid horizontal line from the Tuesday to
Thursday day lines on the chart at the “counting-
time bar.”
5. Zero performance No performance recorded during the recording period. time bar.”
Chart on the line directly below the “counting-
6. Phase change line A line drawn in the space between the last charted day of one intervention phase and the first charted day of a new intervention phase. Draw a vertical line between the intervention
phases. Draw the line from the top of the data to
the “counting-time bar.”
7. Change indicator Words, symbols, or phrases written on the chart in the appropriate phase to indicate changes during that phase. Write word, symbol, and/or phrase. An arrow (➞)
may be used to indicate the continuance of a
change into a new phase.
8. Aim star A symbol used to represent (a) the desired frequency, and (b) the desired date to achieve the frequency. Place the point of the caret . . .
^ for acceleration data
v for deceleration data
. . . on the desired aim date. Place the horizontal
bar on the desired frequency. The caret and
horizontal line will create a “star.”
9. Calendar synchronize A standard time for starting all charts. It requires three charts to cover a full year. The
Sunday before Labor Day begins the first week of
the first chart. The twenty-first week after Labor
Day begins the second chart. The forty-first week
after Labor Day begins the third chart.
10. Celeration line
A straight line drawn through 7–9 or more
charted days. This line indicates the amount of
improvement that has taken place in a given
period of time. A new line is drawn for each
phase for both acceleration and deceleration
targets. (Note: For nonresearch projects it is
acceptable to draw freehand celeration lines.) 
An instructional decision-making system, called
precision teaching, has been developed for use with the
Standard Celeration Chart.8 Precision teaching is predi-
cated on the position that (a) learning is best measured as
a change in response rate, (b) learning most often occurs
through proportional changes in behavior, and (c) past
changes in performance can project future learning.
Precision teaching focuses on celeration, not on the
specific frequency of correct and incorrect responses as
many believe. That frequency is not an emphasis on the
Chart is clear because the Chart uses estimations for most
frequency values. A practitioner or researcher might say,
”I don’t use the chart because I can’t tell by looking at the
chart if the student emitted 24, 25, 26, or 27 responses.”
However, the purpose of the Chart makes such a fine dis-
crimination irrelevant because celeration, not specific fre-
quency, is the issue. A frequency of 24 or 27 will not
change the line of progress—the celeration course.
Advanced charting conventions used by precision
teachers are illustrated in Figure 16 and described in
Table 2. Detailed explanations of the Standard Celera-
tion Chart and its uses can be found in Cooper, Kubina,
and Malanga (1998); Graf and Lindsley (2002); and Pen-
nypacker, Gutierrez, and Lindsley (2003).
Scatterplots
A scatterplot is a graphic display that shows the relative
distribution of individual measures in a data set with re-
spect to the variables depicted by the x and y axes. Data
points on a scatterplot are unconnected. Scatterplots show
how much changes in the value of the variable depicted
by one axis correlate with changes in the value of the
variable represented by the other axis. Patterns of data
Table 2 Advanced Charting Conventions for the Daily Standard Celeration Chart (See also Figure 16)
Term Definition Convention
Frequency:
1. Frequency change (FC) (aka frequency jump up or jump down) The multiply “×” or divide “÷” value that compares the final fre- quency of one phase to the beginning frequency in the next phase. Compute this by comparing (1) the frequency where the celeration line crosses the last day of one phase to (2) the frequency where the celeration line crosses the first day of the
next phase (e.g., a frequency jump from 6/minute to 18/minute.
FC = × 3.0).
Place an “FC =” in the upper left
cell of the analysis matrix.
Indicate the value with a “×”
or “÷
” sign (e.g., FC = × 3.0).
Celeration:
2. Celeration calculation (quarter-intersect method) The process for graphically determining a celeration line (aka “the line of best fit”). (1) Divide the frequencies for each phase into four equal quarters (include ignored and no chance days),
(2) locate the median frequency for each half, and (3) draw a
celeration line connecting the quarter intersect points.
See advanced charting
conventions sample chart.
3. Celeration finder A piece of mylar with standard celeration lines that can be used to compute celeration line values. Buy commercially or copy and
cut out part of the vertical axis
on the Standard Celeration Chart.
4. Projection line A dashed line extending to the future from the celeration line. The projection offers a forecast that enables the calculation of the celeration change value.
See advanced charting
conventions sample chart.
5. Celeration change (CC) (aka celeration turn up or turn down) The multiply “×” or divide “÷” value that compares the celeration of one phase to the celeration in the next phase (e.g., a celer- ation turn down from × 1.3 to ÷ 1.3. CC = ÷ 1.7). Place a “CC =” in the upper mid-
dle cell of the analysis matrix
with the value indicated with a
“×” or “÷
” sign (e.g., CC = ÷ 1.7).
6. Celeration collection A group of three or more celerations for different performers relating to the same behavior over approximately the same time period. Numerically identify the high,
middle, and low celeration in
the celeration collection and
indicate the total number of
celerations in the collection.
7. Bounce change (BC) The multiply “×” or divide “÷” value that compares the bounce in one phase to the bounce in the next phase. Computed by comparing (1) the total bounce of one phase to (2) the total bounce of the next phase (e.g., a bounce change from 5.0 to × 1.4, BC = ÷ 3.6). Place a “BC =” in the upper
right cell of the analysis
matrix with the value indicated
with a multiply “×” or divide “÷
”
symbol (e.g., BC = ÷ 3.6).
8. Analysis matrix The analysis matrix provides the numeric change information regarding the effects of the independent variable(s) on frequency, celeration, and bounce between two phases. Place the analysis matrix be-
tween the two phases being
compared. For acceleration tar-
gets place the matrix above the
data. For deceleration targets
place the matrix below the data.
Optional:
9. Frequency change p-value (FCP) The frequency change p-value is the probability that the noted change in frequency would have occurred by chance. (Use the Fisher exact probability formula to compute the p-value.) Use “FCP =” and indicate the
p-value in the lower left cell
on the analysis matrix (e.g.,
FCP = .0001).
10. Celeration change p-value (CCP) The celeration change p-value is the probability that the change noted in celeration would have occurred by chance. (Use the Fisher exact probability formula to compute the p-value.) Use “CCP =” and indicate the
p-value in the lower middle cell
of the matrix (e.g., CCP = .0001).
11. Bounce change p-value (BCP) The bounce change p-value is the probability that the change noted in bounce would have occurred by chance. (Use the Fisher exact probability formula to compute the p-value.) Use “BCP =” and indicate the
p-value in the lower right cell
of the analysis matrix (e.g.,
BCP = .0001).
points falling along lines on the plane or clusters suggest
certain relationships.
Scatterplots can reveal relationships among differ-
ent subsets of data. For example, Boyce and Geller (2001)
created the scatterplot shown in Figure 17 to see how
the behavior of individuals from different demographic
groups related to a ratio of driving speed and following
distance that represents one element of safe driving (e.g.,
the proportion of data points for young males falling in
the at-risk area of the graph compared to the proportion
of drivers from other groups). Each data point shows a
single driver’s behavior in terms of speed and following
distance and whether the speed and following distance
combination is considered safe or at risk for accidents.
Such data could be used to target interventions for certain
demographic groups.
Applied behavior analysts sometimes use scatterplots
to discover the temporal distribution of a target behavior
(e.g., Kahng et al., 1998; Symons, McDonald, & Wehby,
1998; Touchette, MacDonald, & Langer, 1985). Touchette
and colleagues described a procedure for observing and
recording behavior that produces a scatterplot that graph-
ically shows whether the behavior’s occurrence is typi-
cally associated with certain time periods.Constructing Line Graphs
The skills required to construct effective, distortion-free
graphic displays are as important as any in the behavior
analyst’s repertoire. As applied behavior analysis has de-
veloped, so have certain stylistic conventions and expec-
tations regarding the construction of graphs. An effective
graph presents the data accurately, completely, and
clearly, and makes the viewer’s task of understanding the
data as easy as possible. The graph maker must strive to
fulfill each of these requirements while remaining alert to
features in the graph’s design or construction that might
create distortion and bias—either the graph maker’s or
that of a future viewer when interpreting the extent and
nature of the behavior change depicted by the graph.
Despite the graph’s prominent role in applied be-
havior analysis, relatively few detailed treatments of how
to construct behavioral graphs have been published. No-
table exceptions have been chapters by Parsonson and
Baer (1978, 1986) and a discussion of graphic display
tactics by Johnston and Pennypacker (1980, 1993a). Rec-
ommendations from these excellent sources and others
(Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 2000; American
Psychological Association, 2001; Tufte, 1983, 1990) con-
tributed to the preparation of this section. Additionally,
hundreds of graphs published in the applied behavior
analysis literature were examined in an effort to discover
those features that communicate necessary information
most clearly.
Although there are few hard-and-fast rules for con-
structing graphs, adhering to the following conventions
will result in clear, well-designed graphic displays con-
sistent in format and appearance with current practice.
Although most of the recommendations are illustrated
by graphs presented throughout this text, Figures 18
and 19 have been designed to serve as models for most
of the practices suggested here. The recommendations
given here generally apply to all behavioral graphs. How-
ever, each data set and the conditions under which the
data were obtained present their own challenges to the
graph maker.
Drawing, Scaling, and Labeling Axes
Ratio of the Vertical and Horizontal Axes
The relative length of the vertical axis to the horizontal
axis, in combination with the scaling of the axes, deter-
mines the degree to which a graph will accentuate or min-
imize the variability in a given data set. The legibility of
a graph is enhanced by a balanced ratio between the
height and width so that data are neither too close together
nor too spread apart. Recommendations in the behavioral
literature for the ratio, or relative length, of the vertical
axis to the horizontal axis range from 5:8 (Johnston &
Pennypacker, 1980) to 3:4 (Katzenberg, 1975). Tufte
(1983), whose book The Visual Display of Quantitative
Information is a wonderful storehouse of guidelines and
examples of effective graphing techniques, recommends
a 1:1.6 ratio of vertical axis to horizontal axis.
A vertical axis that is approximately two-thirds the
length of the horizontal axis works well for most be-
havioral graphs. When multiple sets of axes will be pre-
sented atop one another in a single figure and/or when
the number of data points to be plotted on the horizon-
tal axis is very large, the length of the vertical axis rel-
ative to the horizontal axis can be reduced (as shown in
Figures 3 and 7).
Scaling the Horizontal Axis
The horizontal axis should be marked in equal intervals,
with each unit representing from left to right the chrono-
logical succession of equal time periods or response op-
portunities in which the behavior was (or will be)
measured and from which an interpretation of behavior
change is to be made (e.g., days, sessions, trials). When
many data points are to be plotted, it is not necessary to
mark each point along the x axis. Instead, to avoid un-
necessary clutter, regularly spaced points on the hori-
zontal axis are indicated with tic marks numbered by 5s,
10s, or 20s.
When two or more sets of axes are stacked vertically
and each horizontal axis represents the same time frame,
it is not necessary to number the tic marks on the hori-
zontal axes of the upper tiers. However, the hatch marks
corresponding to those numbered on the bottom tier
should be placed on each horizontal axis to facilitate com-
parison of performance across tiers at any given point in
time (see Figure 4).
Representing Discontinuities of Time
on the Horizontal Axis
Behavior change, its measurement, and all manipulations
of treatment or experimental variables occur within and
across time. Therefore, time is a fundamental variable in
all experiments that should not be distorted or arbitrarily
represented in a graphic display. Each equally spaced unit
on the horizontal axis should represent an equal passage
of time. Discontinuities in the progression of time on the
horizontal axis should be indicated by a scale break: an
open spot in the axis with a squiggly line at each end.
Scale breaks on the x axis can also be used to sig-
nal periods of time when data were not collected or
when regularly spaced data points represent consecu-
tive measurements made at unequal intervals (see the
numbering of school days for the follow-up condition in
Figure 18).
When measurement occurs across consecutive ob-
servations (e.g., stories read, meals, interactions) rather
than standard units of time, the horizontal axis still serves
as a visual representation of the progression of time be-
cause the data plotted against it have been recorded one
after the other. The text accompanying such a figure
should indicate the real time in which the consecutive
measurements were made (e.g., “Two or three peer tu-
toring sessions were conducted each school week”), and
discontinuities in that time context should be clearly
marked with scale breaks (see Figure 19).
Labeling the Horizontal Axis
The dimension by which the horizontal axis is scaled
should be identified in a brief label printed and centered
below and parallel to the axis.
Scaling the Vertical Axis
On an equal-interval graph the scaling of the vertical axis
is the most significant feature of the graph in terms of its
portrayal of changes in level and variability in the data.
Common practice is to mark the origin at 0 (on cumula-
tive graphs the bottom on the vertical axis must be 0) and
then to mark off the vertical axis so that the full range of
values represented in the data set are accommodated. In-
creasing the distance on the vertical axis between each
unit of measurement magnifies the variability in the data,
whereas contracting the units of measurement on the ver-
tical axis minimizes the portrayal of variability in the data
set. The graph maker should plot the data set against sev-
eral different vertical axis scales, watching for distortion
of the graphic display that might lead to inappropriate
interpretations.
The social significance of various levels of behavior
change for the behavior being graphed should be con-
sidered in scaling the vertical axis. If relatively small
numerical changes in performance are socially signifi-
cant, the y-axis scale should reflect a smaller range of
values. For example, to display data most effectively
from a training program in which an industrial em-
ployee’s percentage of correctly executed steps in a
safety checklist increased from an unsafe preinterven-
tion range of 80% to 90% to an accident-free postinter-
vention level of 100%, the vertical axis should focus on
the 80% to 100% range. On the other hand, the scaling
of the vertical axis should be contracted when small nu-
merical changes in behavior are not socially important
and the degree of variability obscured by the compressed
scale is of little interest.
Horizontal numbering of regularly spaced tic marks
on the vertical axis facilitates use of the scale. The verti-
cal axis should not be extended beyond the hatch mark in-
dicating the highest value on the axis scale.
When the data set includes several measures of 0,
starting the vertical axis at a point slightly above the hor-
izontal axis keeps data points from falling directly on the
axis. This produces a neater graph and helps the viewer
discriminate 0-value data points from those representing
measures close to 0 (see Figure 18).
In most instances, scale breaks should not be used
on the vertical axis, especially if a data path would cross
the break. However, when two sets of data with widely
different and nonoverlapping ranges are displayed against
the same y axis, a scale break can be used to separate the
range of measures encompassed by each data set (see
Figure 19).
In multiple-tier graphs, equal distances on each ver-
tical axis should represent equal changes in behavior to
aid the comparison of data across tiers. Also, whenever
possible, similar positions on each vertical axis of
multiple-tier graphs should represent similar absolute val-
ues of the dependent variable. When the differences in
behavioral measures from one tier to another would re-
sult in an overly long vertical axis, a scale break can be
used to highlight the difference in absolute values, again
aiding a point-to-point comparison of y axis positions.
Labeling the Vertical Axis
A brief label, printed and centered to the left and paral-
lel to the vertical axis, should identify the dimension by
which the axis is scaled. On multiple-tiered graphs, one
label identifying the dimension portrayed on all of the
vertical axes can be centered along the axes as a group.
Additional labels identifying the different behaviors (or
some other relevant aspect) graphed within each set of
axes are sometimes printed to the left and parallel to each
vertical axis. These individual tier labels should be printed
to the right of and in smaller-sized font than the label
identifying the dimension by which all of the vertical
axes are scaled.
Identifying
Experimental Conditions
Condition Change Lines
Vertical lines extending upward from the horizontal axis
indicate changes in treatment or experimental procedures.
Condition change lines should be placed after (to the right
of) the data point representing the last measure prior to
the change in conditions signified by the line and before
(to the left of) the data point representing the first mea-
sure obtained after the change in procedure. In this way
data points fall clearly on either side of change lines and
never on the lines themselves. Drawing condition change
lines to a height equal to the height of the vertical axis
helps the viewer estimate the value of data points near
the top of the vertical axis range.
Condition change lines can be drawn with either
solid or dashed lines. However, when an experiment or a
treatment program includes relatively minor changes
within an ongoing condition, a combination of solid and
dashed lines should be used to distinguish the major and
minor changes in conditions. For example, the solid lines
in Figure 18 change from baseline, to self-record, to
self-record + tokens, to follow-up conditions, and dashed
lines indicate changes in the schedule of reinforcement
from CRF, to VR 5, to VR 10 within the self-record +
tokens condition.
When the same manipulation of an independent vari-
able occurs at different points along the horizontal axes
of multiple-tiered graphs, a dog-leg connecting the con-
dition change lines from one tier to the next makes it easy
to follow the sequence and timing of events in the ex-
periment (see Figure 19).
Unplanned events that occur during an experiment
or treatment program, as well as minor changes in pro-
cedure that do not warrant a condition change line, can be
indicated by placing small arrows, asterisks, or other sym-
bols next to the relevant data points (see Figure 6) or
just under the x axis (see Figure 19). The figure caption
should explain any special symbols.
Condition Labels
Labels identifying the conditions in effect during each
period of an experiment are centered above the space de-
lineated by the condition change lines. Whenever space
permits, condition labels should be parallel to the horizontal
axis. Labels should be brief but descriptive (e.g., Contin-
gent Praise is preferable to Treatment), and the labels
should use the same terms or phrases used in the accom-
panying text describing the condition. Abbreviations may
be used when space or design limitations prohibit print-
ing the complete label. A single condition label should be
placed above and span across labels identifying minor
changes within that condition (see Figure 18). Num-
bers are sometimes added to condition labels to indicate
the number of times the condition has been in effect dur-
ing the study (e.g., Baseline 1, Baseline 2).
Plotting Data Points and Drawing
Data Paths
Data Points
When graphing data by hand, behavior analysts must
take great care to ensure that they plot each data point
exactly on the coordinate of the horizontal and vertical
axis values of the measurement it represents. The in-
accurate placement of data points is an unnecessary
source of error in graphic displays, which can lead to
mistakes in clinical judgment and/or experimental
method. Accurate placement is aided by careful selec-
tion of graph paper with grid lines sized and spaced ap-
propriately for the data to be plotted. When many
different values must be plotted within a small distance
on the vertical axis, a graph paper with many grid lines
per inch should be used.9
Should a data point fall beyond the range of values
described by the vertical axis scale, it is plotted just above
the scale it transcends with the actual value of the mea-
surement printed in parentheses next to the data point.
Breaks in the data path leading to and from the off-the-
scale data point also help to highlight its discrepancy (see
Figure 19, Session 19).
Data points should be marked with bold symbols that
are easily discriminated from the data path. When only
one set of data is displayed on a graph, solid dots are most
often used. When multiple data sets are plotted on the
same set of axes, a different geometric symbol should be
used for each set of data. The symbols for each data set
should be selected so that the value of each data point
can be determined when data points fall near or on the
same coordinates on the graph (see Figure 18, Sessions
9–11).
Data Paths
Data paths are created by drawing a straight line from
the center of each data point in a given data set to the
center of the next data point in the same set. All data
points in a given data set are connected in this manner
with the following exceptions:
• Data points falling on either side of a condition
change line are not connected.
• Data points should not be connected across a sig-
nificant span of time in which behavior was not
measured. To do so implies that the resultant data
path represents the level and trend of the behavior
during the span of time in which no measurement
was conducted.
• Data points should not be connected across discon-
tinuities of time in the horizontal axis (see Figure
18, 1-week school vacation).
• Data points on either side of a regularly scheduled
measurement period in which data were not col-
lected or were lost, destroyed, or otherwise not avail-
able (e.g., participant’s absence, recording
equipment failure) should not be joined together (see
Figure 18, baseline condition of bottom graph).
• Follow-up or postcheck data points should not be
connected with one another (see Figure 18) un-
less they represent successive measures spaced in
time in the same manner as measures obtained dur-
ing the rest of the experiment (see Figure 19).
• If a data point falls beyond the values described by
the vertical axis scale, breaks should be made in
the data path connecting that data point with those
that fall within the described range (Figure 19,
top graph, Session 19 data point).
When multiple data paths are displayed on the same
graph, different styles of lines, in addition to different
symbols for the data points, may be used to help distin-
guish one data path from another (see Figure 19). The
behavior represented by each data path should be clearly
identified, either by printed labels with arrows drawn to
the data path (see Figures 18 and 19) or by a legend
showing models of the symbols and line styles (see Figure
13). When two data sets travel the same path, their lines
should be drawn close to and parallel with one another to
help clarify the situation (see Figure 18, Sessions 9–11).
Writing the Figure Caption
Printed below the graph, the figure caption should give a
concise but complete description of the figure. The cap-
tion should also direct the viewer’s attention to any fea-
tures of the graph that might be overlooked (e.g., scale
changes) and should explain the meaning of any added
symbols representing special events.
Printing Graphs
Graphs should be printed in only one color—black. Al-
though the use of color can enhance the attractiveness of
a visual display and can effectively highlight certain fea-
tures, it is discouraged in the scientific presentation of
data. Every effort must be made to let the data stand on
their own. The use of color can encourage perceptions of
performance or experimental effects that differ from per-
ceptions of the same data displayed in black. The fact
that graphs and charts may be reproduced in journals and
books is another reason for using black only.
Constructing Graphs
with Computer Software
Software programs for producing computer-generated
graphs have been available and are becoming both in-
creasingly sophisticated and easier to use. Most of the
graphs displayed throughout this book were constructed
with computer software. Even though computer graphics
programs offer a tremendous time savings over hand-
plotted graphs, careful examination should be made of
the range of scales available and the printer’s capability
for both accurate data point placement and precise print-
ing of data paths.
Carr and Burkholder (1998) provided an intro-
duction to creating single-subject design graphs with
Microsoft Excel. Silvestri (2005) wrote detailed,
step-by-step instructions for creating behavioral graphs
using Microsoft Excel. Her tutorial can be found on
the companion Web site that accompanies this text,
www.prenhall.com/cooper.
Interpreting Graphically
Displayed Behavioral Data
The effects of an intervention that produces dramatic,
replicable changes in behavior that last over time are read-
ily seen in a well-designed graphic display. People with
little or no formal training in behavior analysis can read
the graph correctly in such cases. Many times, however, be-
havior changes are not so large, consistent, or durable. Be-
havior sometimes changes in sporadic, temporary, delayed,
or seemingly uncontrolled ways; and sometimes behavior
may hardly change at all. Graphs displaying these kinds of
data patterns often reveal equally important and interesting
subtleties about behavior and its controlling variables.
Behavior analysts employ a systematic form of ex-
amination known as visual analysis to interpret graphi-
cally displayed data. Visual analysis of data from an
applied behavior analysis study is conducted to answer
two questions: (a) Did behavior change in a meaningful
way, and (b) if so, to what extent can that change in be-
havior be attributed to the independent variable? Although
there are no formalized rules for visual analysis, the dy-
namic nature of behavior, the scientific and technologi-
cal necessity of discovering effective interventions, and
the applied requirement of producing socially meaning-
ful levels of performance all combine to focus the
behavior analyst’s interpretive attention on certain
fundamental properties common to all behavioral data: (a)
the extent and type of variability in the data, (b) the level
of the data, and (c) trends in the data. Visual analysis en-
tails an examination of each of these characteristics both
within and across the different conditions and phases of
an experiment.
As Johnston and Pennypacker (1993b) so aptly noted,
“It is impossible to interpret graphic data without being
influenced by various characteristics of the graph itself”
(p. 320). Therefore, before attempting to interpret the
meaning of the data displayed in a graph, the viewer
should carefully examine the graph’s overall construc-
tion. First, the figure legend, axis labels, and all condi-
tion labels should be read to determine a basic
understanding of what the graph is about. The viewer
should then look at the scaling of each axis, taking note
of the location, numerical value, and relative significance
of any scale breaks.
Next, a visual tracking of each data path should be
made to determine whether data points are properly
connected. Does each data point represent a single mea-
surement or observation, or are the data “blocked” such
that each data point represents an average or some other
summary of multiple measurements? Do the data show
the performance of an individual subject or the aver-
age performance of a group of subjects? If blocked or
group data are displayed, is a visual representation of
the range or variation of scores provided (e.g., Armen-
dariz & Umbreit, 1999; Epstein et al., 1981); or do the
data themselves allow determination of the amount of
variability that was collapsed in the graph? For exam-
ple, if the horizontal axis is scaled in weeks and each
data point represents a student’s average score for a
week of daily five-word spelling tests, data points
falling near 0 or at the top end of the closed scale, such
as 4.8, pose little problem because they can be the re-
sult of only minimal variability in the daily scores for
that week. However, data points near the center of the
scale, such as 2 to 3, can result from either stable or
highly variable performance.
If the viewer suspects distortion produced by a
graph’s construction, interpretive judgments of the data
should be withheld until the data are replotted on a new
set of axes. Distortion due to a loss of important data fea-
tures in summarizing is not so easily remedied. The viewer
must consider the report incomplete and forestall any in-
terpretive conclusions until he has access to the raw data.
Only when the viewer is satisfied that the graph is
properly constructed and does not visually distort the be-
havioral and environmental events it represents, should
the data themselves be examined. The data are then in-
spected to find what they reveal about the behavior mea-
sured during each condition of the study.
Visual Analysis within Conditions
Data within a given condition are examined to determine
(a) the number of data points, (b) the nature and extent of
variability in the data, (c) the absolute and relative level
of the behavioral measure, and (d) the direction and de-
gree of any trend(s) in the data.
Number of Data Points
First, the viewer should determine the quantity of data
reported during each condition. This entails a simple
counting of data points. As a general rule, the more mea-
surements of the dependent variable per unit of time and
the longer the period of time in which measurement oc-
curred, the more confidence one can have in the data
path’s estimation of the true course of behavior change
(given, of course, a valid and accurate observation and
measurement system).
The number of data points needed to provide a be-
lievable record of behavior during a given condition also
depends on how many times the same condition has been
repeated during the study. As a rule, fewer data points
are needed in subsequent replications of an experimen-
tal condition if the data depict the same level and trend
in performance that were noted in earlier applications of
the condition.
The published literature of applied behavior analysis
also plays a part in determining how many data points
are sufficient. In general, less lengthy phases are required
of experiments investigating relations between previously
studied and well-established variables if the results are
also similar to those of the previous studies. More data are
needed to demonstrate new findings, whether or not new
variables are under investigation.
There are other exceptions to the rule of the-more-
data-the-better. Ethical concerns do not permit the
repeated measurement of certain behaviors (e.g.,
self-injurious behavior) under an experimental condition
in which there is little or no expectation for improvement
(e.g., during a no-treatment baseline condition or a con-
dition intended to reveal variables that exacerbate prob-
lem behavior). Also, there is little purpose in repeated
measurement in situations in which the subject cannot
logically perform the behavior (e.g., measuring the num-
ber of correct answers to long division problems when
concurrent observations indicate that the student has not
learned the necessary component skills of multiplication
and subtraction). Nor are many data points required to
demonstrate that behavior did not occur when in fact it
had no opportunity to occur.
Familiarity with the response class measured and the
conditions under which it was measured may be the graph
viewer’s biggest aid in determining how many data points
constitute believability. The quantity of data needed in a
given condition is also partly determined by the analytic
tactics employed in a given study.
Variability
How often and the extent to which multiple measures of
behavior yield different outcomes is called variability. A
high degree of variability within a given condition usu-
ally indicates that the researcher or practitioner has
achieved little control over the factors influencing the be-
havior. (An important exception to this statement is when
the purpose of an intervention is to produce a high de-
gree of variability.) In general, the greater the variability
within a given condition, the greater the number of data
points that are necessary to establish a predictable pat-
tern of performance. By contrast, fewer data points are re-
quired to present a predictable pattern of performance
when those data reveal relatively little variability.
Level
The value on the vertical axis scale around which a set of
behavioral measures converge is called level. In the visual
analysis of behavioral data, level is examined within a
condition in terms of its absolute value (mean, median,
and/or range) on the y-axis scale, the degree of stability
or variability, and the extent of change from one level to
another. The graphs in Figure 20 illustrate four differ-
ent combinations of level and variability.
The mean level of a series of behavioral measures
within a condition can be graphically illustrated by the ad-
dition of a mean level line: a horizontal line drawn
through a series of data points within a condition at that
point on the vertical axis equaling the average value of the
series of measures (e.g., Gilbert, Williams, & McLaugh-
lin, 1996). Although mean level lines provide an easy-
to-see summary of average performance within a given
condition or phase, they should be used and interpreted
with caution. With highly stable data paths, mean level
lines pose no serious drawbacks. However, the less vari-
ability there is within a series of data points, the less need
there is for a mean level line. For instance, a mean level
line would serve little purpose in Graph A in Figure 20.
And although mean level lines have been added to Graphs
B, C, and D in Figure 20, Graph B is the only one of the
three for which a mean level line provides an appropri-
ate visual summary of level. The mean level line in Graph
C is not representative of any measure of behavior taken
during the phase. The data points in Graph C show a be-
havior best characterized as occurring at two distinct lev-
els during the condition and beg for an investigation of the
factor(s) responsible for the clear change in levels. The
mean level line in Graph D is also inappropriate because
the variability in the data is so great that only 4 of the 12
data points fall close to the mean level line.
A median level line is another method for visually
summarizing the overall level of behavior in a condition.
Because a median level line represents the most typical
performance within a condition, it is not so influenced
by one or two measures that fall far outside the range of
the remaining measures. Therefore, one should use a me-
dian level line instead of a mean level line to graphically
represent the central tendency of a series of data points
that include several outliers, either high or low.
Change in level within a condition is determined by
calculating the difference in absolute values on the y axis
between the first and last data points within the condi-
tion. Another method, somewhat less influenced by vari-
ability in the data, is to compare the difference between
the median value of the first three data points in the con-
dition with the median value of the final three data points
in the condition (Koenig & Kunzelmann, 1980).
Trend
The overall direction taken by a data path is its trend.
Trends are described in terms of their direction (increas-
ing, decreasing, or zero trend), degree or magnitude, and
extent of variability of data points around the trend. The
graphs in Figure 21 illustrate a variety of trends. The di-
rection and degree of trend in a series of graphed data
points can be visually represented by a straight line drawn
through the data called a trend line or line of progress.
Several methods for calculating and fitting trends lines to
a series of data have been developed. One can simply in-
spect the graphed data and draw a straight line that visu-
ally provides the best fit through the data. For this
freehand method, Lindsley (1985) suggested ignoring
one or two data points that fall well beyond the range of
the remaining values in a data series and fitting the trend
line to the remaining scores. Although the freehand
method is the fastest way of drawing trend lines and can
be useful for the viewer of a published graph, hand-drawn
trend lines may not always result in an accurate repre-
sentation of trend and are typically not found in graphs
of published studies.
Trend lines can also be calculated using a mathe-
matical formula called the ordinary least-squares linear
regression equation (McCain & McCleary, 1979; Par-
sonson & Baer, 1978). Trend lines determined in this
fashion have the advantage of complete reliability: The
same trend line will always result from the same data set.
The disadvantage of this method is the many mathemat-
ical operations that must be performed to calculate the
trend line. A computer program that can perform the
equation can eliminate the time concern in calculating a
least-squares trend line.
A method of calculating and drawing lines of
progress that is more reliable than the freehand method
and much less time-consuming than linear regression
methods is the split-middle line of progress. The split-
middle technique was developed by White (1971, 2005)
for use with rate data plotted on semilogarithmic charts,
and it has proven a useful technique for predicting future
behavior from such data. Split-middle lines of progress
can also be drawn for data plotted against an equal-
interval vertical axis, but it must be remembered that such
a line is only an estimate that summarizes the overall
trend (Bailey, 1984). Figure 22 provides a step-by-step
illustration of how to draw split-middle lines of progress.
A trend line cannot be drawn by any method through a se-
ries of data points spanning a scale break in the vertical
axis and generally should not be drawn across scale
breaks in the horizontal axis.
The specific degree of acceleration or deceleration of
trends in data plotted on semilogarithmic charts can be
quantified in numerical terms. For example, on the daily
Standard Celeration Chart a “times-2” celeration means
that the response rate is doubling each week, and a “times-
1.25” means that the response rate is accelerating by a fac-
tor of one fourth each week. A “divide-by-2” celeration
means that each week the response rate will be one half of
what it was the week before, and a “divide-by-1.5” means
that the frequency is decelerating by one third each week.
There is no direct way to determine visually from
data plotted on equal-interval charts the specific rates at
which trends are increasing or decreasing. But visual
comparison of trend lines drawn through data on equal-
interval charts can provide important information about
the relative rates of behavior change.
A trend may be highly stable with all of the data
points falling on or near the trend line (see Figure 21,
Graphs C and E). Data paths can also follow a trend even
though a high degree of variability exists among the data
points (see Figure 21, Graphs D and F).
Visual Analysis between Conditions
After inspection of the data within each condition or
phase of a study, visual analysis proceeds with a com-
parison of data between conditions. Drawing proper con-
clusions entails comparing the previously discussed
properties of behavioral data—level, trend, and stability/
variability—between different conditions and among sim-
ilar conditions.
A condition change line indicates that an indepen-
dent variable was manipulated at a given point in time. To
determine whether an immediate change in behavior oc-
curred at that point in time, one needs to examine the dif-
ference between the last data point before the condition
change line and the first data point in the new condition.
The data are also examined in terms of the overall
level of performance between conditions. In general,
when all data points in one condition fall outside the
range of values for all data points in an adjacent condi-
tion (that is, there is no overlap of data points between the
highest values obtained in one condition and the lowest
values obtained in the other condition), there is little
doubt that behavior changed from one condition to the
next. When many data points in adjacent conditions over-
lap one another on the vertical axis, less confidence can
be placed in the effect of the independent variable asso-
ciated with the change in conditions.10
Mean or median level lines can be helpful in exam-
ining the overall level between conditions. However,
using mean or median level lines to summarize and com-
pare the overall central tendency of data across condi-
tions poses two serious problems. First, the viewer of
such a visual display must guard against letting “appar-
ently large differences among measures of central ten-
dency visually overwhelm the presence of equally large
amounts of uncontrolled variability” (Johnston & Pen-
nypacker, 1980, p. 351). Emphasis on mean changes in
performance in a graphic display can lead the viewer to
believe that a greater degree of experimental control was
obtained than is warranted by the data. In the top graph
of Figure 23 half of the data points in Condition B fall
within the range of values of the measures taken during
Condition A, but the mean level lines suggest a clear
change in behavior. Second, measures of central tendency
can obscure important trends in the data that warrant in-
terpretations other than those suggested by the central
tendency indicators. Although a mean or median line ac-
curately represents the average or typical performance,
neither provides any indication of increasing or decreas-
ing performance. In the bottom graph of Figure 23, for
example, the mean line suggests a higher level of per-
formance in Condition B than in Condition A, but an ex-
amination of trend yields a very different picture of
behavior change within and between Conditions A and B.
Those analyzing behavioral data should also note
any changes in level that occur after a new condition has
been in place for some time and any changes in level that
occur early in a new condition but are later lost. Such de-
layed or temporary effects can indicate that the indepen-
dent variable must be in place for some time before
behavior changes, or that the temporary level change was
the result of an uncontrolled variable. Either case calls
for further investigation in an effort to isolate and control
relevant variables.
Visual analysis of data between adjacent conditions
includes an examination of the trends exhibited by the
data in each condition to determine whether the trend
found in the first condition changed in direction or slope
during the subsequent condition. In practice, because each
data point in a series contributes to level and trend, the
two characteristics are viewed in conjunction with one
another. Figure 24 presents stylized data paths illustrat-
ing four basic combinations of change or lack of change
in level and trend between adjacent conditions. Of course,
many other data patterns could display the same charac-
teristics. Idealized, straight-line data paths that eliminate
the variability found in most repeated measures of be-
havior have been used to highlight level and trend.
Visual analysis includes not only an examination and
comparison of changes in level and trend between adja-
cent conditions, but also an examination of performance
across similar conditions. Interpreting what the data from
an applied behavior analysis mean requires more than
visual analysis and the identification and description of
level, trend, and variability. When behavior change is
demonstrated over the course of a treatment program or
research study, the next question to be asked is, Was the
change in behavior a function of the treatment or experi-
mental variables?
Summary
Applied behavior analysts document and quantify behav-
ior change by direct and repeated measurement of behav-
ior, and the product of those measurements called data.
Graphs are relatively simple formats for visually display-
ing relationships among and between a series of mea-
surements and relevant variables.
Purpose and Benefits of Graphic Display
of Behavioral Data
3. Graphing each measure of behavior as it is collected pro-
vides the practitioner or researcher with an immediate and
ongoing visual record of the participant’s behavior, al-
lowing treatment and experimental decisions to be re-
sponsive to the participant’s performance.
4. Direct and continual contact with the data in a readily an-
alyzable format enables the practitioner or researcher to
identify and investigate interesting variations in behavior
as they occur.
5. As a judgmental aid for interpreting experimental results,
graphic display is a fast, relatively easy-to-learn method
that imposes no arbitrary levels of significance for evalu-
ating behavior change.
6. Visual analysis of graphed data is a conservative method
for determining the significance of behavior change; only
variables able to produce meaningful effects repeatedly
are considered significant, and weak and unstable vari-
ables are screened out.
7. 8. Graphs enable and encourage independent judgments of
the meaning and significance of behavior change by others.
Graphs can serve as effective sources of feedback to the
people whose behavior they represent.
Types of Graphs Used in Applied Behavior Analysis
9. Line graphs, the most commonly used format for the
graphic display of behavioral data, are based on the Carte-
sian plane, a two-dimensional area formed by the inter-
section of two perpendicular lines.
10. Major parts of the simple line graph are the horizontal axis
(also called the x axis), the vertical axis (also called the
y axis), condition change lines, condition labels, data
points, the data path, and the figure caption.
11. Graphs with multiple data paths on the same set of axes are
used in applied behavior analysis to show (a) two or more
dimensions of the same behavior, (b) two or more differ-
ent behaviors, (c) the same behavior under different and al-
ternating experimental conditions, (d) changes in target
behavior relative to the changing values of an independent
variable, and (e) the behavior of two or more participants.
12. A second vertical axis, which is drawn on the right-hand
side of the horizontal axis, is sometimes used to show dif-
ferent scales for multiple data paths.
13. Bar graphs are used for two primary purposes: (a) to dis-
play discrete data not related by an underlying dimension
that can be used to scale the horizontal axis and (b) to sum-
marize and enable easy comparison of the performance of
a participant or group of participants during the different
conditions of an experiment.
14. Each data point on a cumulative record represents the total
number of responses emitted by the subject since mea-
surement began. The steeper the slope of the data path on
a cumulative graph, the higher the response rate.
15. Overall response rate refers to the average rate of re-
sponse over a given time period; a local response rate
refers to the rate of response during a smaller period of
time within a larger period for which an overall response
rate has been given.
16. Cumulative records are especially effective for displaying
data when (a) the total number of responses made over
time is important, (b) the graph is used as a source of feed-
back to the subject, (c) the target behavior can occur only
once per measurement period, and (d) a fine analysis of
a single instance or portions of data from an experiment
is desired.
17. Semilogarithmic charts use a logarithmic-scaled y axis so
that changes in behavior that are of equal proportion (e.g.,
doublings of the response measure) are represented by
equal distances on the vertical axis.
18. The Standard Celeration Chart is a six-cycle multiply-
divide graph that enables the standardized charting of cel-
eration, a linear measure of frequency change across time,
a factor by which frequency multiplies or divides per unit
of time.
19. A scatterplot shows the relative distribution of individual
measures in a data set with respect to the variables de-
picted by the x and y axes.
Constructing Line Graphs
20. The vertical axis is drawn to a length approximately two
thirds that of the horizontal axis.
21. 22. 23. 24. The horizontal axis is marked off in equal intervals, each
representing from left to right the chronological succession
of equal time periods within which behavior was measured.
Discontinuities of time are indicated on the horizontal axis
by scale breaks.
The vertical axis is scaled relative to the dimension of be-
havior measured, the range of values of the measures ob-
tained, and the social significance of various levels of
change in the target behavior.
Condition change lines indicate changes in the treatment
program or manipulations of an independent variable and
are drawn to the same height as the vertical axis.
25. A brief, descriptive label identifies each condition of an
experiment or behavior change program.
26. Data points should be accurately placed with bold, solid
dots. When multiple data paths are used, different geo-
metric symbols are used to distinguish each data set.
27. Data paths are created by connecting successive data points
with a straight line.
28. Successive data points should not be connected when (a)
they fall on either side of a condition change line; (b) they
span a significant period of time in which behavior was
not measured; (c) they span discontinuities of time on the
horizontal axis; (d) they fall on either side of a regularly
scheduled measurement period in which data were not col-
lected or were lost, destroyed, or otherwise not available;
(e) they fall in a follow-up or postcheck period that is not
regularly spaced in time in the same manner as the rest of
the study; or (f) one member of the pair falls outside the
range of values described by the vertical axis.
29. The figure caption provides a concise but complete de-
scription of the graph, giving all of the information needed
to interpret the display.
30. Graphs should be printed in black ink only.
Interpreting Graphically Displayed Behavioral Data
31. Visual analysis of graphed data attempts to answer two
questions: (a) did a socially meaningful change in behav-
ior take place, and (b) if so, can the behavior change be at-
tributed to the independent variable?
32. Before beginning to evaluate the data displayed in a graph,
a careful examination of the graph’s construction should
be undertaken. If distortion is suspected from the features
of the graph’s construction, the data should be replotted on
a new set of axes before interpretation is attempted.
33. Blocked data and data representing the average perfor-
mance of a group of subjects should be viewed with the un-
derstanding that significant variability may have been lost
in the display.
34. Visual analysis of data within a given condition focuses
on the number of data points, the variability of perfor-
mance, the level of performance, and the direction and de-
gree of any trends in the data.
35. As a general rule, the more data in a condition and the
greater the stability of those data, the more confidence one
can place in the data path’s estimate of behavior during
that time. The more variability in the behavioral measures
during a condition, the greater the need for additional data.
36. Variability refers to the frequency and degree to which
multiple measures of behavior yield different outcomes. A
high degree of variability within a given condition usually
indicates that little or no control has been achieved over the
factors influencing the behavior.
37. Level refers to the value on the vertical axis around which
a series of data points converges. When the data in a given
condition all fall at or near a specific level, the behavior is
considered stable with respect to level; to the extent that
the behavioral measures vary considerably from one to an-
other, the data are described as showing variability with re-
spect to level. In cases of extreme variability, no particular
level of performance is evidenced.
38. Mean or median level lines are sometimes added to graphic
displays to represent the overall average or typical per-
formance during a condition. Mean and median level lines
should be used and interpreted with care because they can
obscure important variability and trends in the data.
39. Trend refers to the overall direction taken by a data path;
trends are described in terms of their direction (increas-
ing, decreasing, or zero trend), degree (gradual or steep),
and the extent of variability of data points around the trend.
40. Trend direction and degree can be visually represented by
drawing a trend line, or line of progress, through a series
of data points. Trend lines can be drawn freehand, using
the least-squares regression equation, or using a method
called the split-middle line of progress. Split-middle lines
of progress can be drawn quickly and reliably and have
proven useful in analyzing behavior change.
41. Visual analysis of data across conditions determines
whether change in level, variability, and/or trend occurred
and to what extent any changes were significant.