Reversal and Alternating
Treatments Designs

Key Terms
A-B-A design DRO reversal technique (NCR) reversal technique
A-B-A-B design irreversibility reversal design
alternating treatments design multielement design sequence effects
B-A-B design multiple treatment interference withdrawal design
DRI/DRA reversal technique multiple treatment reversal design

This chapter describes the reversal and alter-
nating treatments designs, two types of experi-
mental analysis tactics widely used by applied
behavior analysts. In a reversal design, the effects of in-
troducing, withdrawing (or "reversing" the focus of), and
reintroducing an independent variable are observed on
the target behavior. In an alternating treatments analysis,
two or more experimental conditions are rapidly alter-
nated, and the differential effects on behavior are noted.
We explain how each design incorporates the three ele-
ments of steady state strategy-prediction, verification,
and replication-and present representative examples il-
lustrating the major variations of each. Considerations
for selecting and using reversal and alternating treatments
designs are also presented.
Reversal Design
An experiment using a reversal design entails repeated
measures of behavior in a given setting that requires at
least three consecutive phases: (a) an initial baseline phase
in which the independent variable is absent, (b) an inter-
vention phase during which the independent variable is
introduced and remains in contact with the behavior, and
(c) a return to baseline conditions accomplished by with-
drawal of the independent variable. In the widely used no-
tation system for describing experimental designs in
applied behavior analysis, the capital letters A and B de-
note the first and second conditions, respectively, that are
introduced in a study. Typically baseline (A) data are col-
lected until steady state responding is achieved. Next, an
intervention (B) condition is applied that signifies the pres-
ence of a treatment-the independent variable. An ex-
periment entailing one reversal is described as an
A-B-A design. Although studies using an A-B-A design
are reported in the literature (e.g., Christle & Schuster,
2003; Geller, Paterson, & Talbott, 1982; Jacobson,
Bushell, & Risley, 1969; Stitzer, Bigelow, Liebson, &
Hawthorne, 1982), an A-B-A-B design is preferred be-
cause reintroducing the B condition enables the replication
of treatment effects, which strengthens the demonstration
of experimental control (see Figure 1).'
The A-B-A-B reversal is the most straightforward
and generally most powerful within-subject design for
demonstrating a functional relation between an environ-
mental manipulation and a behavior. When a functional
relation is revealed with a reversal design, the data show
how the behavior works.
As explanations go, the one offered by the reversal de-
sign was not at all a bad one. In answer to the question,
"How does this response work?" we could point out
demonstrably that it worked like so le.g., see Figure
1]. Of course, it might also work in other ways; but,
we would wait until we had seen the appropriate graphs
before agreeing to any other way. (Baer, 1975, p. 19)
Baer's point must not be overlooked: Showing that a
behavior works in a predictable and reliable way in the
presence and absence of a given variable provides only
one answer to the question, How does this behavior
work? There may be (and quite likely are) other control-
ling variables for the targeted response class. Whether
additional experimentation is needed to explore those
other possibilities depends on the social and scientific
importance of obtaining a more complete analysis.
Operation and Logic of the
Reversal Design
Risley (2005) described the rationale and operation of
the reversal design as follows:
The reversal or ABAB design that Wolf reinvented from
Claude Bernard's early examples in experimental medi-
cine entailed establishing a baseline of repeated quanti-
fied observations sufficient to see a trend and forecast
that trend into the near future (A); to then alter conditions
and see if the repeated observations become different
than they were forecast to be (B); to then change back
and see if the repeated observations return to confirm the
original forecast (A); and finally, to reintroduce the al-
tered conditions and see if the repeated observations
again become different than forecast (B). (pp. 280-281)-
A brief review here of the roles of prediction, ver-
ification, and replication in the reversal design will suf-
fice. Figure 2 shows the same data from Figure 1 with
the addition of the open data points representing pre-
dicted measures of behavior if conditions in the previ-
ous phase had remained unchanged. After a stable
pattern of responding, or a countertherapeutic trend, is
obtained during Baseline 1, the independent variable is
introduced. In our hypothetical experiment the measures
obtained during Treatment 1, when compared with those
from Baseline 1 and with the measures predicted by
Baseline 1, show that behavior change occurred and that
the change in behavior coincided with the intervention.
After steady state responding is attained in Treatment 1,
the independent variable is withdrawn and baseline con-
ditions are reestablished. If the level of responding in
Baseline 2 is the same as or closely approximates the
measures obtained during Baseline 1, verification of the
prediction made for Baseline 1 data is obtained. Stated
otherwise, had the intervention not been introduced and
had the initial baseline condition remained in effect, the
predicted data path would have appeared as shown in
Baseline 2. When withdrawal of the independent vari-
able results in a reversal of the behavior change associ-
ated with its introduction, a strong case builds that the
intervention is responsible for the observed behavior
change. If reintroduction of the independent variable in
Treatment 2 reproduces the behavior change observed
during Treatment 1, replication of effect has been
achieved, and a functional relation has been demon-
strated. Again stated in other terms, had the intervention
continued and had the second baseline condition not been
introduced, the predicted data path of the treatment would
have appeared as shown in Treatment 2.
Romaniuk and colleagues (2002) provided an ex-
cellent example of the A-B-A-B design. Three students
with developmental disabilities who frequently displayed
problem behaviors (e.g., hitting, biting, whining, crying,
getting out of seat, inappropriate gestures, noises, and
comments) when given academic tasks participated in
the study. Prior to the experiment a functional analysis
had shown that each student's problem behaviors were
maintained by escape from working on the task (i.e.,
problem behavior occurred most often when followed by
being allowed to take a break from the task). The re-
searchers wanted to determine whether providing stu-
dents with a choice of which task to work on would
reduce the frequency of their problem behavior, even
though problem behavior, when it occurred, would still
result in a break. The experiment consisted of two con-
ditions: no choice (A) and choice (B). The same set of
teacher-nominated tasks was used in both conditions.
Each session during the no-choice condition began
with the experimenter providing the student with a task
and saying, "This is the assignment you will be working
on today" or "It's time to work on __" (p. 353). Dur-
ing the choice condition (B), the experimenter placed the
materials for four to six tasks on the table before the stu-
dent and said, "Which assignment would you like to work
on today?" (p. 353). The student was also told that he or
she could switch tasks at any time during the session by
requesting to do so. Occurrences of problem behavior in
both conditions resulted in the experimenter stating, "You
can take a break now" and giving a 10-second break.
Figure 3 shows the results of the experiment. The
data reveal a clear functional relation between the op-
portunity to choose which tasks to work on and reduced
occurrence of problem behavior by all three students. The
percentage of session time in which each student exhib-
ited problem behavior (reported as a total duration mea-
sure obtained by recording the second of onset and offset
as shown by the VCR timer) decreased sharply from the
no-choice (baseline) levels when the choice condition
was implemented, returned (reversed) to baseline levels
when choice was withdrawn, and decreased again when
choice was reinstated. The A-B-A-B design enabled Ro-
maniuk and colleagues to conduct a straightforward, un-
ambiguous demonstration that significant reductions in
problem behavior exhibited by each student were a func-
tion of being given a choice of tasks.
In the 1960s and early 1970s applied behavior ana-
lysts relied almost exclusively on the A-B-A-B reversal
design. The straightforward A-B-A-B design played such
a dominant role in the early years of applied behavior
analysis that it came to symbolize the field (Baer, 1975).
This was no doubt due, at least in part, to the rever-
sal design's ability to expose variables for what they
are-strong and reliable or weak and unstable. An-
other reason for the reversal design's dominance may have
been that few alternative analytic tactics were available
at that time that effectively combined the intrasubject
experimental elements of prediction, verification, and
replication. Although the reversal design is just one
of many experimental designs available to applied
behavior analysts today, the simple, unadorned A-B-A-B
design continues to play a major role in the behavior
analysis literature (e.g., Anderson & Long, 2002; Ash-
baugh & Peck, 1998; Cowdery, Iwata, & Pace, 1990;
Reversal and Alterna
Deaver, Miltenberger, & Stricker, 2001; Gardner, Heward,
& Grossi, 1994; Levondoski & Cartledge, 2000; Lindberg,
Iwata, Kahng, & DeLeon, 1999; Mazaleski, Iwata,
Rodgers, Vollmer, & Zarcone, 1994; Taylor & Alber, 2003;
Umbreit, Lane, & Dejud, 2004).
Variations of the A-B-A-B Design
Many applied behavior analysis studies use variations or
extensions of the A-B-A-B design.
Repeated Reversals
Perhaps the most obvious variation of the A-B-A-B re-
versal design is a simple extension in which the inde-
pendent variable is withdrawn and reintroduced a second
time; A-B-A-B-A-B (see the graph for Maggie in Figure
3). Each additional presentation and withdrawal that
reproduces the previously observed effects on behavior
increases the likelihood that the behavior changes are the
result of manipulating the independent variable. All other
things being equal, an experiment that incorporates mul-
tiple reversals presents a more convincing and compelling
demonstration of a functional relation than does an ex-
periment with one reversal (e.g., Fisher, Lindauer, Alter-
son, & Thompson, 1998; Steege et al., 1990). That said,
it is also possible to reach a point of redundancy beyond
which the findings of a given analysis are no longer en-
hanced significantly by additional reversals.
B-A-B Design
The B-A-B design begins with the application of the in-
dependent variable: the treatment. After stable responding
has been achieved during the initial treatment phase (B),
the independent variable is withdrawn. If the behavior
worsens in the absence of the independent variable (the
A condition), the treatment variable is reintroduced in an
attempt to recapture the level of responding obtained dur-
ing the first treatment phase, which would verify the pre-
diction based on the data path obtained during the initial
treatment phase.
Compared to the A-B-A design, the B-A-B design is
preferable from an applied sense in that the study ends
with the treatment variable in effect. However, in terms
of demonstrating a functional relation between the inde-
pendent variable and dependent variable, the B-A-B de-
sign is the weaker of the two because it does not enable
an assessment of the effects of the independent variable on
the preintervention level of responding. The noninter-
vention (A) condition in a B-A-B design cannot verify a
prediction of a previous nonexistent baseline. This weak-
ness can be remedied by withdrawing and then reintro-
ducing the independent variable, as in a B-A-B-A-B
design (e.g., Dixon, Benedict, & Larson, 2001.
Because the B-A-B design provides no data to de-
termine whether the measures of behavior taken during
the A condition represent preintervention performance,
sequence effects cannot be ruled out: The level of be-
havior observed during the A condition may have been in-
fluenced by the fact that the treatment condition preceded
it. Nevertheless, there are exigent situations in which ini-
tial baseline data cannot be collected. For instance, the
B-A-B design may be appropriate with target behaviors
that result in physical harm or danger to the participant
or to others. In such instances, withholding a possibly
effective treatment until a stable pattern of baseline re-
sponding can be obtained may present ethical problems.
For example, Murphy, Ruprecht, Baggio, and Nunes
(1979) used a B-A-B design to evaluate the effectiveness
of mild punishment combined with reinforcement on the
number of self-choking responses by a 24-year-old man
with profound mental retardation. After the treatment
was in effect for 24 sessions, it was withdrawn for three
sessions, during which an immediate and large increase
in self-choking was recorded (see Figure 4). Reintro-
duction of the treatment package reproduced behavior
levels noted during the first treatment phase. The average
number of self-chokes during each phase of the B-A-B
ness can be remedied by withdrawing and then reintro-
ducing the independent variable, as in a B-A-B-A-B
design (e.g., Dixon, Benedict, & Larson, 2001.
Because the B-A-B design provides no data to de-
termine whether the measures of behavior taken during
the A condition represent preintervention performance,
sequence effects cannot be ruled out: The level of be-
havior observed during the A condition may have been in-
fluenced by the fact that the treatment condition preceded
it. Nevertheless, there are exigent situations in which ini-
tial baseline data cannot be collected. For instance, the
B-A-B design may be appropriate with target behaviors
that result in physical harm or danger to the participant
or to others. In such instances, withholding a possibly
effective treatment until a stable pattern of baseline re-
sponding can be obtained may present ethical problems.
For example, Murphy, Ruprecht, Baggio, and Nunes
(1979) used a B-A-B design to evaluate the effectiveness
of mild punishment combined with reinforcement on the
number of self-choking responses by a 24-year-old man
with profound mental retardation. After the treatment
was in effect for 24 sessions, it was withdrawn for three
sessions, during which an immediate and large increase
in self-choking was recorded (see Figure 4). Reintro-
duction of the treatment package reproduced behavior
levels noted during the first treatment phase. The average
number of self-chokes during each phase of the B-A-B
Multiple Treatment Reversal Designs
Experiments that use the reversal design to compare the
effects of two or more experimental conditions to base-
line and/or to one another are said to use a multiple treat-
ment reversal design. The letters C, D, and so on, denote
additional conditions, as in the A-B-C-A-C-B-C design
used by Falcomata, Roane, Hovanetz, Kettering, and
Keeney (2004); the A-B-A-B-C-B-C design used by Free-
land and Noell (1999); the A-B-C-B-C-B-C design used
by Lerman, Kelley, Vorndran, Kuhn, and LaRue (2002);
the A-B-A-C-A-D-A-C-A-D design used by Weeks and
Gaylord-Ross (1981); and the A-B-A-B-B+C-B-B+C de-
sign of Jason and Liotta (1982). As a whole, these de-
signs are considered variations of the reversal design
because they embody the experimental method and logic
of the reversal tactic: Responding in each phase provides
baseline (or control condition) data for the subsequent
phase (prediction), independent variables are withdrawn
in an attempt to reproduce levels of behavior observed
in a previous condition (verification), and each indepen-
dent variable that contributes fully to the analysis is
introduced at least twice (replication). Independent vari-
ables can be introduced, withdrawn, changed in value,
combined, and otherwise manipulated to produce an end-
less variety of experimental designs.
For example, Kennedy and Souza (1995) used an
A-B-C-B-C-A-C-A-C design to analyze and compare the
effects of two kinds of competing sources of stimulation
on eye poking by a 19-year-old student with profound
disabilities. Geoff had a 12-year history of poking his
forefinger into his eyes during periods of inactivity, such
as after lunch or while waiting for the bus. The two treat-
ment conditions were music (B) and a video game (C).
During the music condition, Geoff was given a Sony
Walkman radio with headphones. The radio was tuned
to a station that his teacher and family thought he pre-
ferred. Geoff had continuous access to the music during
this condition, and he could remove the headphones at
any time. During the video game condition, Geoff was
given a small handheld video game on which he could
observe a variety of visual patterns and images on the
screen with no sound. As with the music condition, Geoff
had continuous access to the video game and could dis-
continue using it at any time.
Figure 5 shows the results of the study. Following
an initial baseline phase (A) in which Geoff averaged 4
eye pokes per hour, the music condition (B) was intro-
duced and eye pokes decreased to a mean of 2.8 per hour.
The video game (C) was implemented next, and eye
pokes decreased further to 1.1 per hour. Measures ob-
tained during the next two phases—a reintroduction of
music (B) followed by a second phase of the video game
(C)-replicated previous levels of responding under each
condition. This B-C-B-C portion of the experiment
revealed a functional relation between video game con-
dition and lower frequency of eye pokes compared to
music. The final five phases of the experiment (C-A-C-
A-C) provided an experimental comparison of the video
game and baseline (no-treatment) condition.
In most instances, extended designs involving mul-
tiple independent variables are not preplanned. Instead
of following a predetermined, rigid structure that dictates
when and how experimental manipulations must be
made, the applied behavior analyst makes design deci-
sions based on ongoing assessments of the data.
In this sense, a single experiment may be viewed as a
number of successive designs that are collectively neces-
sary to clarify relations between independent and depen-
dent variables. Thus, some design decisions might be
made in response to the data unfolding as the investiga-
tion progresses. This sense of design encourages the ex-
perimenter to pursue in more dynamic fashion the
solutions to problems of experimental control immedi-
ately upon their emergence. (Johnston & Pennypacker,
1980, pp. 250-251)
Students of applied behavior analysis should not in-
terpret this description of experimental design as a rec-
ommendation for a completely free-form approach to the
manipulation of independent variables. The researcher
must always pay close attention to the rule of changing
only one variable at a time and must understand the op-
portunities for legitimate comparisons and the limitations
that a given sequence of manipulations places on the con-
clusions that can be drawn from the results.
Experiments that use the reversal design to compare
two or more treatments are vulnerable to confounding by
sequence effects. Sequence effects are the effects on a
subject's behavior in a given condition that are the result
of the subject's experience with a prior condition. For ex-
ample, caution must be used in interpreting the results
from the A-B-C-B-C design that results from the fol-
lowing fairly common sequence of events in practice:
After baseline (A), an initial treatment (B) is implemented
and little or no behavioral improvements are noted. A
second treatment (C) is then tried, and the behavior im-
proves. A reversal is then conducted by reintroducing the
first treatment (B), followed by reinstatement of the sec-
ond treatment (C) (e.g., Foxx & Shapiro, 1978). In this
case, we can only speak knowingly about the effects of
C when it follows B. Recapturing the original baseline
levels of responding before introducing the second treat-
ment condition (i.e., an A-B-A-C-A-C sequence) reduces
the threat of sequence effects (or helps to expose them
for what they are).
An A-B-A-B-C-B-C design, for instance, enables di-
rect comparisons of B to A and C to B, but not of C to A.
An experimental design consisting of A-B-A-B-B+C-B-
B+C (e.g., Jason & Liotta, 1982) permits an evaluation of
the additive or interactive effects of B+C, but does not
reveal the independent contribution of C. And in both of
these examples, it impossible to determine what effects,
if any, C may have had on the behavior if it had been im-
plemented prior to B. Manipulating each condition so
that it precedes and follows every other condition in the
experiment (e.g., A-B-A-B-C-B-C-A-C-A-C) is the only
way to know for sure. However, manipulating multiple
conditions requires a large amount of time and resources,
and such extended designs become more susceptible to
confounding by maturation and other historical variables
not controlled by the experimenter.
NCR Reversal Technique
With interventions based on positive reinforcement, it
can be hypothesized that observed changes in behavior
are the result of the participant's feeling better about him-
self because of the improved environment created by the
reinforcement, not because a specific response class has
been immediately followed by contingent reinforcement.
This hypothesis is most often advanced when interven-
tions consisting of social reinforcement are involved. For
example, a person may claim that it doesn't matter how
the teacher's praise and attention were given; the stu-
dent's behavior improved because the praise and attention
created a warm and supporting environment. If, however,
the behavioral improvements observed during a contin-
gent reinforcement condition are lost during a condition
when equal amounts of the same consequence are deliv-
ered independent of the occurrence of the target behav-
ior, a functional relation between the reinforcement
contingency and behavior change is demonstrated. In
other words, such an experimental control technique can
show that behavior change is the result of contingent re-
inforcement, not simply the presentation of or contact
with the stimulus event (Thompson & Iwata, 2005).
A study by Baer and Wolf (1970a) on the effects of
teachers' social reinforcement on the cooperative play of
a preschool child provides an excellent example of the
NCR reversal technique (Figure 6). The authors de-
scribed the use and purpose of the design as follows:
[The teachers first collected] baselines of cooperative
and other related behaviors of the child, and of their own
interaction with the child. Ten days of observation indi-
cated that the child spent about 50% of each day in prox-
imity with other children (meaning within 3 feet of them
indoors, or 6 feet outdoors). Despite this frequent prox-
imity, however, the child spent only about 2% of her day
in cooperative play with these children. The teachers, it
was found, interacted with this girl about 20% of the
day, not all of it pleasant. The teachers, therefore, set up
a period of intense social reinforcement, offered not for
cooperative play but free of any response requirement at
all: the teachers took turns standing near the girl, attend-
ing closely to her activities, offering her materials, and
smiling and laughing with her in a happy and admiring
manner. The results of 7 days of this noncontingent ex-
travagance of social reinforcement were straightforward:
the child's cooperative play changed not at all, despite
the fact that the other children of the group were greatly
attracted to the scene, offering the child nearly double
the chance to interact with them cooperatively. These
7 days having produced no useful change, the teachers
then began their planned reinforcement of cooperative
behavior. ... Contingent social reinforcement, used in
amounts less than half that given during the noncontin-
gent period, increased the child's cooperative play from
its usual 2% to a high of 40% in the course of 12 days of
reinforcement. At that point, in the interests of certainty,
the teachers discontinued contingent reinforcement in
favor of noncontingent. In the course of 4 days, they lost
virtually all of the cooperative behavior they had gained
during the reinforcement period of the study, the child
showing about a 5% average of cooperative play over
that period of time. Naturally, the study concluded with a
return to the contingent use of social reinforcement, a re-
covery of desirable levels of cooperative play, and a
gradual reduction of the teacher's role in maintaining
that behavior. (pp. 14-15)
day, not all of it pleasant. The teachers, therefore, set up
a period of intense social reinforcement, offered not for
cooperative play but free of any response requirement at
all: the teachers took turns standing near the girl, attend-
ing closely to her activities, offering her materials, and
smiling and laughing with her in a happy and admiring
manner. The results of 7 days of this noncontingent ex-
travagance of social reinforcement were straightforward:
the child's cooperative play changed not at all, despite
the fact that the other children of the group were greatly
attracted to the scene, offering the child nearly double
the chance to interact with them cooperatively. These
7 days having produced no useful change, the teachers
then began their planned reinforcement of cooperative
behavior. ... Contingent social reinforcement, used in
amounts less than half that given during the noncontin-
gent period, increased the child's cooperative play from
its usual 2% to a high of 40% in the course of 12 days of
reinforcement. At that point, in the interests of certainty,
the teachers discontinued contingent reinforcement in
favor of noncontingent. In the course of 4 days, they lost
virtually all of the cooperative behavior they had gained
during the reinforcement period of the study, the child
showing about a 5% average of cooperative play over
that period of time. Naturally, the study concluded with a
return to the contingent use of social reinforcement, a re-
covery of desirable levels of cooperative play, and a
gradual reduction of the teacher's role in maintaining
that behavior. (pp. 14-15)
DRO Reversal Technique
One way to ensure that reinforcement will not immedi-
ately follow the target behavior is to deliver reinforce-
ment immediately following the subject's performance
of any behavior other than the target behavior: With a
DRO reversal technique, the control condition consists
of delivering the event suspected of functioning as rein-
forcement following the emission of any behavior other
than the target behavior (e.g., Baer, Peterson, & Sher-
man, 1967; Osbourne, 1969; Poulson, 1983). For exam-
ple, Reynolds and Risley (1968) used contingent teacher
attention to increase the frequency of talking in a 4-year-
old girl enrolled in a preschool program for disadvan-
taged children. After a period of teacher attention contin-
gent on verbalization, in which the girl's talking increased
from a baseline average of 11% of the intervals observed
to 75%, a DRO condition was implemented during which
the teachers attended to the girl for any behavior except
talking. During the 6 days of DRO, the girl's verbalization
dropped to 6%. Teacher attention was then delivered con-
tingent on talking, and the girl's verbalization "immedi-
ately increased to an average of 51%" (p. 259).

DRI/DRA Reversal Technique
During the control condition in a DRI/DRA reversal
technique, occurrences of a specified behavior that is ei-
ther incompatible with the target behavior (i.e., the two
behaviors cannot possibly be emitted at the same time) or
an alternative to the target behavior are immediately fol-
lowed by the same consequence previously delivered as
contingent reinforcement for the target behavior. Goetz
and Baer's (1973) investigation of the effects of teacher
praise on preschool children's creative play with building
blocks illustrates the use of a DRI control condition.
Figure 7 shows the number of different block forms
(e.g., arch, tower, roof, ramp) constructed by the three
children who participated in the study. During baseline
(data points indicated by the letter N), "the teacher sat by
the child as she built with the blocks, watching closely but
quietly, displaying neither criticism nor enthusiasm about
any particular use of the blocks" (p. 212). During the next
phase (the D data points), "the teacher remarked with in-
terest, enthusiasm, and delight every time that the child
placed and/or rearranged the blocks so as to create a form
that had not appeared previously in that session's con-
struction(s). ... 'Oh, that's very nice—that's different!'"
(p. 212). Then, after increasing form diversity was clearly
established, instead of merely withdrawing verbal praise
and returning to the initial baseline condition, the teacher
provided descriptive praise only when the children had
constructed the same forms (the S data points). "Thus,
for the next two to four sessions, the teacher continued to
display interest, enthusiasm, and delight, but only at those
times when the child placed and/or rearranged a block
so as to create a repetition of a form already apparent in
that session's construction(s). ... Thus, no first usage of
a form in a session was reinforced, but every second
usage of that form and every usage thereafter within the
session was. ... 'How nice—another arch!'" (p. 212).
The final phase of the experiment entailed a return to de-
scriptive praise for different forms. Results show that the
form diversity of children's block building was a func-
tion of teacher praise and comments. The DRI reversal
tactic allowed Goetz and Baer to determine that it was
not just the delivery of teacher praise and comment that
tablished, instead of merely withdrawing verba
d returning to the initial baseline condition,
ovided descriptive praise only when the childr
nstructed the same forms (the S data points).
r the next two to four sessions, the teacher c
splay interest, enthusiasm, and delight, but o
mes when the child placed and/or rearranged a I
as to create a repetition of a form already a
at session's construction(s). ... Thus, no fir:
form in a session was reinforced, but every se
age of that form and every usage thereafter wi
ssion was. ... 'How nice-another arch!'" (p. 2'
e final phase of the experiment entailed a ret
convincing demonstration of experimental control. In ad-
dition, the reversal design enables quantification of the
amount of behavior change over the preintervention level
of responding. And the return to baseline provides infor-
mation on the need to program for maintenance. Fur-
thermore, a complete A-B-A-B design ends with the
treatment condition in place.
In spite of its strengths as a tool for analysis, the re-
versal design entails some potential scientific and social
disadvantages that should be considered prior to its use.
The considerations are of two types: irreversibility, which
affects the scientific utility of the design; and the social,
educational, and ethical concerns related to withdrawing
a seemingly effective intervention.
Irreversibility: A Scientific Consideration
A reversal design is not appropriate in evaluating the ef-
fects of a treatment variable that, by its very nature, can-
not be withdrawn once it has been presented. Although
independent variables involving reinforcement and pun-
ishment contingencies can be manipulated with some
certainty-the experimenter either presents or withholds
the contingency-an independent variable such as pro-
viding information or modeling, once presented, cannot
simply be removed. For example, a reversal design
would not be an effective element of an experiment in-
vestigating the effects of attending an in-service training
workshop for teachers during which participants ob-
served a master teacher use contingent praise and atten-
tion with students. After the participants have listened
to the rationale for using contingent praise and attention
and observed the master teacher model it, the exposure
provided by that experience could not be withdrawn.
Such interventions are said to be irreversible.
Irreversibility of the dependent variable must also be
considered in determining whether a reversal would be an
effective analytic tactic. Behavioral irreversibility means
that a level of behavior observed in an earlier phase cannot
be reproduced even though the experimental conditions are
the same as they were during the earlier phase (Sidman,
1960). Once improved, many target behaviors of interest
to the applied behavior analyst remain at their newly en-
hanced level even when the intervention responsible for the
behavior change is removed. From a clinical or educational
standpoint, such a state of affairs is desirable: The behav-
Irreversibility: A Scientific Consideration
A reversal design is not appropriate in evaluating the ef-
fects of a treatment variable that, by its very nature, can-
not be withdrawn once it has been presented. Although
independent variables involving reinforcement and pun-
ishment contingencies can be manipulated with some
certainty-the experimenter either presents or withholds
the contingency-an independent variable such as pro-
viding information or modeling, once presented, cannot
simply be removed. For example, a reversal design
would not be an effective element of an experiment in-
vestigating the effects of attending an in-service training
workshop for teachers during which participants ob-
served a master teacher use contingent praise and atten-
tion with students. After the participants have listened
to the rationale for using contingent praise and attention
and observed the master teacher model it, the exposure
provided by that experience could not be withdrawn.
Such interventions are said to be irreversible.
Irreversibility of the dependent variable must also be
considered in determining whether a reversal would be an
effective analytic tactic. Behavioral irreversibility means
that a level of behavior observed in an earlier phase cannot
be reproduced even though the experimental conditions are
the same as they were during the earlier phase (Sidman,
1960). Once improved, many target behaviors of interest
to the applied behavior analyst remain at their newly en-
hanced level even when the intervention responsible for the
behavior change is removed. From a clinical or educational
standpoint, such a state of affairs is desirable: The behav-
ior change is shown to be durable, persisting even in the
absence of continued treatment. However, irreversibility is
a problem if demonstration of the independent variable's
role in the behavior change depends on verification by re-
capturing baseline levels of responding.
For example, baseline observations might reveal very
low, almost nonexistent, rates of talking and social inter-
action for a young child. An intervention consisting of
teacher-delivered social reinforcement for talking and in-
teracting could be implemented, and after some time the
girl might talk to and interact with her peers at a frequency
and in a manner similar to that of her classmates. The in-
dependent variable, teacher-delivered reinforcement,
could be terminated in an effort to recapture baseline rates
of talking and interacting. But the girl might continue to
talk to and interact with her classmates even though the
intervention, which may have been responsible for the
initial change in her behavior, is withdrawn. In this case
a source of reinforcement uncontrolled by the experi-
menter-the girl's classmates talking to and playing with
her as a consequence of her increased talking and inter-
acting with them-could maintain high rates of behavior
after the teacher-delivered reinforcement is no longer pro-
Social Concerns. Applied behavior analysis is, by
definition, a social enterprise. Behaviors are selected,
defined, observed, measured, and modified by and for
people. Sometimes the people involved in an applied
behavior analysis-administrators, teachers, parents,
and participants— object to the withdrawal of an inter-
vention they associate with desirable behavior change.
Even though a reversal may provide the most unquali-
fied picture of the behavior-environment relation under
study, it may not be the analytic tactic of choice be-
cause key participants do not want the intervention to
be withdrawn. When a reversal design offers the best
experimental approach scientifically and poses no ethi-
cal problems, the behavior analyst may choose to ex-
plain the operation and purpose of the tactic to those
who do not favor it. But it is unwise to attempt a rever-
sal without the full support of the people involved, es-
pecially those who will be responsible for withdrawing
the intervention (Tawney & Gast, 1984). Without their
cooperation the procedural integrity of the experiment
could easily be compromised. For example, people who
are against the withdrawal of treatment might sabotage
the return to baseline conditions by implementing the
intervention, or at least those parts of it that they con-
sider the most important.
Educational and Clinical Issues. Educational or
clinical issues concerning the reversal design are often
raised in terms of instructional time lost during the re-
versal phases, as well as the possibility that the behav-
ioral improvements observed during intervention may
not be recaptured when treatment is resumed after a re-
turn to baseline conditions. We agree with Stolz (1978)
that "extended reversals are indefensible." If preinter-
vention levels of responding are reached quickly, rever-
sal phases can be quite short in duration. Sometimes
only three or four sessions are needed to show that ini-
tial baseline rates have been reproduced (e.g., Ash-
baugh & Peck, 1998; Cowdery Iwata, & Pace, 1990).
Two or three brief reversals can provide an extremely
convincing demonstration of experimental control.
Concern that the improved levels of behavior will not
return when the treatment variable is reintroduced,
while understandable, has not been supported by em-
pirical evidence. Hundreds of published studies have
shown that behavior acquired under a given set of envi-
ronmental conditions can be reacquired rapidly during
subsequent reapplication of those conditions.
intervention, or at least those parts of it that they con-
sider the most important.
Educational and Clinical Issues. Educational or
clinical issues concerning the reversal design are often
raised in terms of instructional time lost during the re-
versal phases, as well as the possibility that the behav-
ioral improvements observed during intervention may
not be recaptured when treatment is resumed after a re-
turn to baseline conditions. We agree with Stolz (1978)
that "extended reversals are indefensible." If preinter-
vention levels of responding are reached quickly, rever-
sal phases can be quite short in duration. Sometimes
only three or four sessions are needed to show that ini-
tial baseline rates have been reproduced (e.g., Ash-
baugh & Peck, 1998; Cowdery Iwata, & Pace, 1990).
Two or three brief reversals can provide an extremely
convincing demonstration of experimental control.
Concern that the improved levels of behavior will not
return when the treatment variable is reintroduced,
while understandable, has not been supported by em-
pirical evidence. Hundreds of published studies have
shown that behavior acquired under a given set of envi-
ronmental conditions can be reacquired rapidly during
subsequent reapplication of those conditions.
sidered for evaluating a treatment for self-injurious or
dangerous behaviors. With mild self-injurious or ag-
gressive behaviors, short reversal phases consisting of
one or two baseline probes can sometimes provide the
empirical evidence needed to reveal a functional rela-
tion (e.g., Kelley, Jarvie, Middlebrook, McNeer, &
Drabman, 1984; Luce, Delquadri, & Hall, 1980; Mur-
phy et al., 1979 [Figure 4]). For example, in their
study evaluating a treatment for elopement (i.e., run-
ning away from supervision) by a child with attention-
deficient/hyperactivity disorder, Kodak, Grow, and
Northrup (2004) returned to baseline conditions for a
single session (see Figure 8).
Nonetheless, with some behaviors it may be deter-
mined that withdrawing an intervention associated with
improvement for even a few one-session probes would
be inappropriate for ethical reasons. In such cases ex-
perimental designs that do not rely on the reversal tactic
must be used.

Alternating Treatments
Design
An important and frequently asked question by teachers,
therapists, and others who are responsible for changing
behavior is, Which of these treatments will be most
effective with this student or client? In many situations,
the research literature, the analyst's experience, and/or
logical extensions of the principles of behavior point to
Operation and Logic of the
Alternating Treatments Design
The alternating treatments design is characterized by
the rapid alternation of two or more distinct treatments
(i.e., independent variables) while their effects on the tar-
get behavior (i.e., dependent variable) are measured. In
contrast to the reversal design in which experimental ma-
nipulations are made after steady state responding is
achieved in a given phase of an experiment, the different
interventions in an alternating treatments design are ma-
nipulated independent of the level of responding. The de-
sign is predicated on the behavioral principle of stimulus
discrimination. To aid the subject's discrimination of
which treatment condition is in effect during a given ses-
sion, a distinct stimulus (e.g., a sign, verbal instructions,
different colored worksheets) is often associated with
each treatment.
The data are plotted separately for each intervention to
provide a ready visual representation of the effects of
each treatment. Because confounding factors such as
time of administration have been neutralized (presum-
ably) by counterbalancing, and because the two treat-
ments are readily discriminable by subjects through
instructions or other discriminative stimuli, differences
in the individual plots of behavior change corresponding
with each treatment should be attributable to the treat-
ment itself, allowing a direct comparison between two
(or more) treatments. (Barlow & Hayes, 1979, p. 200)
Figure 9 shows a graphic prototype of an alternat-
ing treatments design comparing the effects of two treat-
ments, A and B, on some response measure. In an
alternating treatments design, the different treatments can
be alternated in a variety of ways. For example, the treat-
ments might be (a) alternated across daily sessions, one
treatment in effect each day: (b) administered in separate
sessions occurring within the same day; or (c) imple-
mented each during a portion of the same session. Coun-
terbalancing the days of the week, times of day, sequence
in which the different treatments occur (e.g., first or sec-
ond each day), persons delivering the different treatments,
and so forth, reduces the probability that any observed
differences in behavior are the result of variables other
than the treatments themselves. For example, assume that
Treatments A and B in Figure 9 were each administered
for a single 30-minute session each day, with the daily
sequence of the two treatments determined by a coin flip.
The data points in Figure 9 are plotted on the hor-
izontal axis to reflect the actual sequence of treatments
each day. Thus, the horizontal axis is labeled Sessions,
and each consecutive pair of sessions occurred on a sin-
gle day. Some published reports of experiments using an
alternating treatments design in which two or more treat-
ments were presented each day (or session) plot the mea-
sures obtained during each treatment above the same
point on the horizontal axis, thus implying that the treat-
ments were administered simultaneously. This practice
masks the temporal order of events and has the unfortu-
nate consequence of making it difficult for the researcher
or reader to discover potential sequence effects.
The three components of steady state strategy— pre-
diction, verification, and replication-are found in the
alternating treatments design. However, each component
is not readily identified with a separate phase of the de-
sign. In an alternating treatments design, each successive
data point for a specific treatment plays all three roles: It
provides (a) a basis for the prediction of future levels of
responding under that treatment, (b) potential verification
of the previous prediction of performance under that treat-
ment, and (c) the opportunity for replication of previous
effects produced by that treatment.
To see this logic unfold, the reader should place a
piece of paper over all the data points in Figure 9 ex-
cept those for the first five sessions of each treatment.
The visible portions of the data paths provide the basis
for predicting future performance under each respective
treatment. Moving the paper to the right reveals the two
data points for the next day, each of which provides a de-
gree of verification of the previous predictions. As more
data are recorded, the predictions of given levels of re-
sponding within each treatment are further strengthened
by continued verification (if those additional data con-
form to the same level and/or trend as their predecessors).
Replication occurs each time Treatment A is reinstated
and measurement reveals responding similar to previous
Treatment A measures and different from those obtained
when Treatment B is in effect. Likewise, another mini-
replication is achieved each time a reintroduction of
Treatment B results in measures similar to previous Treat-
ment B measures and different from Treatment A levels
of responding. A consistent sequence of verification and
replication is evidence of experimental control and
strengthens the investigator's confidence of a functional
relation between the two treatments and different levels
of responding.
The presence and degree of experimental control in
an alternating treatments design is determined by visual
inspection of the differences between (or among) the data
paths representing the different treatments. Experimental
control is defined in this instance as objective, believable
evidence that different levels of responding are pre-
dictably and reliably produced by the presence of the dif-
ferent treatments. When the data paths for two treatments
show no overlap with each other and either stable levels
or opposing trends, a clear demonstration of experimen-
tal control has been made. Such is the case in Figure 9,
in which there is no overlap of data paths and the picture
of differential effects is clear. When some overlap of data
paths occurs, a degree of experimental control over the
target behavior can still be demonstrated if the majority
of data points for a given treatment fall outside the range
of values of the majority of data points for the contrast-
ing treatment.
The extent of any differential effects produced by
two treatments is determined by the vertical distance
or fractionation— between their respective data paths and
quantified by the vertical axis scale. The greater the ver-
tical distance, the greater the differential effect of the two
treatments on the response measure. It is possible for ex-
perimental control to be shown between two treatments
but for the amount of behavior change to be socially in-
significant. For instance, experimental control may be
demonstrated for a treatment that reduces a person's se-
vere self-injurious behavior from 10 occurrences per hour
to 2 per hour, but the participant is still engaged in self-
mutilation. However, if the vertical axis is scaled mean-
ingfully, the greater the separation of data paths on the
vertical axis, the higher the likelihood that the difference
represents a socially significant effect.
Data from an experiment that compared the effects
of two types of group-contingent rewards on the spelling
accuracy of fourth-grade underachievers (Morgan, 1978)
illustrate how the alternating treatments design reveals
experimental control and the quantification of differential
effects. The six children in the study were divided into
two equally skilled teams of three on the basis of pretest
scores. Each day during the study the students took a five-
word spelling test. The students received a list of the
words the day before, and a 5-minute study period was
provided just prior to the test. Three different conditions
were used in the alternating treatments design: (a) no
game, in which the spelling tests were graded immedi-
ately and returned to the students, and the next scheduled
activity in the school day was begun; (b) game, in which
test papers were graded immediately, and each member
of the team who had attained the highest total score re-
ceived a mimeographed Certificate of Achievement and
was allowed to stand up and cheer; and (c) game plus,
consisting of the same procedure as the game condition,
plus each student on the winning team also received a
small trinket (e.g., a sticker or pencil).
The results for Student 3 (see Figure 10) show that
experimental control over spelling accuracy was obtained
between the no-game condition and both the game and
the game-plus conditions. Only the first two no-game
data points overlap the lower range of scores obtained
during the game or the game-plus conditions. However,
the data paths for the game and game-plus conditions
overlap completely and continuously throughout the
study, revealing no difference in spelling accuracy be-
tween the two treatments. The vertical distance between
the data paths represents the amount of improvement in
spelling accuracy between the no-game condition and the
game and the game-plus conditions. The mean difference
between the two game conditions and the no-game con-
dition was two words per test. Whether such a difference
represents a significant improvement is an educational
question, not a mathematical or statistical one, but most
educators and parents would agree that an increase of
two words spelled correctly out of five is socially signif-
icant, especially if that gain can be sustained from week
to week. The cumulative effect over a 180-day school
year would be impressive. There was virtually no differ-
ence in Student 3's spelling performance between the
game and game-plus conditions. However, even a larger
mean difference would not have contributed to the con-
clusions of the study because of the lack of experimen-
tal control between the game and the game-plus treat-
ments.
Student 6 earned consistently higher spelling scores
in the game-plus condition than he did in the game or no-
game conditions (see Figure 11). Experimental control
was demonstrated between the game-plus and the other
two treatments for Student 6, but not between the no-
game and game conditions. Again, the difference in re-
sponding between treatments is quantified by the vertical
distance between the data paths. In this case there was a
mean difference of 1.55 correctly spelled words per test
between the game-plus and no-game conditions.
Figures 10 and 11 illustrate two other important
points about the alternating treatments design. First, the
two graphs show how an alternating treatments design
enables a quick comparison of interventions. Although
the study would have been strengthened by the collection
of additional data, after 20 sessions the teacher had suf-
ficient empirical evidence for selecting the most effective
consequences for each student. If only two conditions had
been compared, even fewer sessions may have been re-
quired to identify the most effective intervention. Second,
these data underscore the importance of evaluating treat-
ment effects at the level of the individual subject. All six
children spelled more words correctly under one or both
of the game conditions than they did under the no-game
condition. However, Student 3's spelling accuracy was
equally enhanced by either the game or the game-plus
contingency, whereas Student 6's spelling scores im-
proved only when a tangible reward was available.
Variations of the Alternating
Treatments Design
The alternating treatments design can be used to com-
pare one or more treatments to a no-treatment or baseline
condition, assess the relative contributions of individual
components of a package intervention, and perform
parametric investigations in which different values of an
independent variable are alternated to determine differ-
ential effects on behavior change. Among the most com-
mon variations of the alternating treatments design are
the following:
• Single-phase alternating treatments design without
a no-treatment control condition
• Single-phase design in which two or more condi-
tions, one of which is a no-treatment control condi-
tion, are alternated
• Two-phase design consisting of an initial baseline
phase followed by a phase in which two or more
conditions (one of which may be a no-treatment
control condition) are alternated
• Three-phase design consisting of an initial base-
line, a second phase in which two or more condi-
tions (one of which may be a no-treatment control
condition) are alternated, and a final phase in
which only the treatment that proved most effec-
tive is implemented
Alternating Treatments Design
without a No-Treatment Control Condition
One application of the alternating treatments design con-
sists of a single-phase experiment in which the effects of
two or more treatment conditions are compared (e.g.,
Barbetta, Heron, & Heward, 1993; McNeish, Heron, &
Okyere, 1992; Morton, Heward, & Alber, 1998). A study
by Belfiore, Skinner, and Ferkis (1995) provides an ex-
cellent example of this design. They compared the ef-
fects of two instructional procedures-trial-repetition and
response-repetition-on the acquisition of sight words
by three elementary students with learning disabilities in
reading. An initial training list of five words for each con-
dition was created by random selection from a pool of
unknown words (determined by pretesting each student).
Each session began with a noninstructional assessment of
unknown and training words, followed by both condi-
tions. The order of instructional conditions was counter-
balanced across sessions. Words spoken correctly on three
consecutive noninstructional assessments were consid-
ered mastered and replaced as training words with un-
known words.
The trial-repetition condition consisted of one re-
sponse opportunity within each of five interspersed prac-
tice trials per word. The experimenter placed a word card
on the table and said, "Look at the word, and say the
word." If the student made a correct response within 3
seconds, the experimenter said, "Yes, the word is _
(p. 347). If the student's initial response was incorrect, or
the student made no response within 3 seconds, the ex-
perimenter said, "No, the word is __," and the student
repeated the word. The experimenter then presented the
next word card and the procedure repeated until five prac-
tice trials (antecedent-response-feedback) were provided
with each word.
The response-repetition condition also consisted of
five response opportunities per word, but all five re-
sponses occurred within a single practice trial for each
word. The experimenter placed a word card on the table
and said, "Look at the word, and say the word." If the
student made a correct response within 3 seconds, the
experimenter said, "Yes, the word is _ _ please repeat
the word four more times" (p. 347). If the student made
an incorrect response or no response within 3 seconds, the
experimenter said, "No, the word is _ _" The student
then repeated the word and was instructed to repeat it
four more times.
Figure 12 shows the cumulative number of words
mastered by each student under both conditions. Even
though the number of correct responses per word during
instruction was identical in both conditions, all three stu-
dents had higher rates of learning new words in the trial-
repetition condition than in the response-repetition
condition. These results obtained within the simple al-
ternating treatments design enabled Belfiore and col-
leagues (1995) to conclude that, "Response repetition
outside the context of the learning trial (i.e., of the three-
term contingency) was not as effective as repetition that
included antecedent and consequent stimuli in relation
to the accurate response" (p. 348).
Alternating Treatments Design
with No-Treatment Control Condition
Although not a requirement of the design, a no-treatment
condition is often incorporated into the alternating treat-
ments design as one of the treatments to be compared.
For example, the no-game condition in the Morgan
(1978) study served as a no-treatment control condition
against which the students' spelling scores in the game
and game-plus conditions were compared (see Figures
10 and 11).
Including a no-treatment control condition as one of
the experimental conditions in an alternating treatments
design provides valuable information on any differences
in responding under the intervention treatments) and no
treatment. However, the measures obtained during the
no-treatment control condition should not be considered
representative of an unknown preintervention level of re-
sponding. It may be that the measures obtained in the no-
treatment condition represent only the level of behavior
under a no-treatment condition when it is interspersed
within an ongoing series of treatment condition(s), and do
not represent the level of behavior that existed before the
alternating treatments design was begun.
Alternating Treatments Design
with Initial Baseline
Investigators using the alternating treatments tactic often
use a two-phase experimental design in which baseline
measures are collected until a stable level of responding
or countertherapeutic trend is obtained prior to the alter-
nating treatments phase (e.g., Martens, Lochner, & Kelly,
1992 [see Figure 6 of Chapter entitled *Schedules of
Reinforcement"]). Sometimes the baseline condition is
continued during the alternating treatments phase as a
no-treatment control condition.
A study by J. Singh and N. Singh (1985) provides
an excellent example of an alternating treatments design
incorporating an initial baseline phase. The experiment
evaluated the relative effectiveness of two procedures for
reducing the number of oral reading errors by students
with mental retardation. The first phase of the study con-
sisted of a 10-day baseline condition in which each stu-
dent was given a new 100-word passage three times each
day and told, "Here is the story for this session. I want
you to read it. Try your best not to make any errors"
(p. 66). The experimenter sat nearby but did not assist
the student, correct any errors, or attend to self-corrections.
If a student requested help with new or difficult words, he
was prompted to continue reading.
During the alternating treatments phase of the study,
three different conditions were presented each day in sep-
arate sessions of about 5 minutes each: control (the same
procedures as during baseline), word supply, and word
analysis. To minimize any sequence or carryover effects
from one condition to another, the three conditions were
presented in random order each day, each condition was
preceded with specific instructions identifying the pro-
cedure to be implemented, and an interval of at least 5
minutes separated consecutive sessions. During the word-
supply condition, each student was instructed, "Here is
the story for this session. I want you to read it. I will help
you if you make a mistake. I will tell you the correct word
while you listen and point to the word in the book. After
that, I want you to repeat the word. Try your best not to
make any errors" (p. 67). The experimenter supplied the
correct word when an oral reading error was made, had
the child repeat the correct word once, and instructed the
child to continue reading. During the word-analysis con-
dition, each student was instructed, "Here is the story for
this session. I want you to read it. I will help you if you
make a mistake. I will help you sound out the word and
then you can read the word correctly before you carry on
reading the rest of the story. Try your best not to make any
errors" (p. 67). When errors were made in this condition,
the experimenter directed the child's attention to the pho-
netic elements of the word and coaxed the child to sound
out correctly each part of the word. Then the experi-
menter had the student read the entire word at the nor-
mal speed and instructed him or her to continue reading
the passage.
The results for the four students who participated in
the study are shown in Figure 13. Each baseline data
point is the mean number of errors for the three daily ses-
sions. Although the data in each condition are highly vari-
able (perhaps because of the varied difficulty of the
different passages used), experimental control is evident.
All four students committed fewer errors during the word-
supply and the word-analysis conditions than they did
during the control condition. Experimental control of oral
reading errors, although not complete because of some
overlap of the data paths, is also demonstrated between
the word-supply and word-analysis conditions, with
all four students making fewer errors during the word-
analysis condition.
By beginning the study with a baseline phase,
J. Singh and N. Singh (1985) were able to compare the
level of responding obtained during each of the treat-
ments to the natural level of performance uncontami-
nated by the introduction of either error-correction
intervention. In addition, the initial baseline served as
the basis for predicting and assessing the measures ob-
tained during the control sessions of the alternating treat-
ments phase of the study. The measures obtained in the
alternating control condition matched the relatively high
frequency of errors observed during the initial baseline
phase, providing evidence that (a) the vertical distance
between the data paths for the word-supply and word-
analysis conditions and the data path for the control con-
dition represents the true amount of improvement
produced by each treatment and (b) the frequency of er-
rors during the control condition was not influenced by
reduced errors during the other two treatments (i.e., no
generalized reduction in oral reading errors from the
treated passages to untreated passages occurred).
Alternating Treatments Design with Initial
Baseline and Final Best Treatment Phase
A widely used variation of the alternating treatments de-
sign consists of three sequential phases: an initial base-
line phase, a second phase comparing alternating
treatments, and a final phase in which only the most ef-
fective treatment is administered (e.g., Heckaman, Alber,
Hooper, & Heward, 1998; Kennedy & Souza, 1995,
Study 4; Ollendick, Matson, Esvelt-Dawson, & Shapiro,
1980; N. Singh, 1990; N. Singh & J. Singh, 1984; N.
Singh & Winton, 1985). Tincani (2004) used an alter-
nating treatments design with an initial baseline and final
best treatment phase to investigate the relative effective-
ness of sign language and picture exchange training on
the acquisition of mands (requests for preferred items)
by two children with autism.' A related research ques-
tion was whether a relation existed between students' pre-
existing motor imitation skills and their abilities to learn
mands through sign language or by picture exchange.
Two assessments were conducted for each student prior
to baseline. A stimulus preference assessment (Pace,
Ivancic, Edwards, Iwata, & Page, 1985) was conducted
to identify a list of 10 to 12 preferred items (e.g., drinks,
edibles, toys), and each student's ability to imitate 27
hand, arm, and finger movements similar to those re-
quired for sign language was assessed.®
The purpose of baseline was to ensure that the par-
ticipants were not able to request preferred items with
picture exchange, sign language, or speech prior to train-
ing. Baseline trials consisted of giving the student 10 to
20 seconds of noncontingent access to a preferred item,
removing the item briefly, and then placing it out of the
student's reach. A laminated 2-inch-by-2-inch picture of
the item was placed in front of the student. If the student
placed the picture symbol in the experimenter's hand,
signed the name of the item, or spoke the name of the
item within 10 seconds, the experimenter provided ac-
cess to the item. If not, the item was removed and the
next item on the list was presented. Following a three-
session baseline, during which neither participant emit-
ted an independent mand in any modality, the alternating
treatments phase was begun.
The sign language training procedures were adapted
from Sundberg and Partington's (1998) Teaching Lan-
guage to Children with Autism or Other Developmental
Disabilities. The simplest sign from American Sign Lan-
guage for each item was taught. Procedures used in the
PECS training condition were adapted from Bondy and
Frost's (2002) The Picture Exchange Communication
System Training Manual. In both conditions, training on
each preferred item continued for five to seven trials per
session, or until the participant showed no interest in the
item. At that time training then began on the next item
and continued until all 10 or 12 items on the participant's
list of preferred items had been presented. During the
study's final phase, each participant received either sign
language or PECS training only, depending on which
method had been most successful during the alternating
treatments phase.
The percentage of independent mands by the two
students throughout the study is shown in Figures 14
(Jennifer) and 15 (Carl). Picture exchange training was
clearly more effective than sign language for Jennifer.
Jennifer demonstrated weak motor imitation skills in the
prebaseline assessment, correctly imitating 20% of the
motor movements attempted in the prebaseline imitation
assessment. After a slight modification in sign language
training procedures was implemented to eliminate Carl's
prompt dependency, he emitted independent mands more
often during sign language training than with picture ex-
change training. Carl's preexisting motor imitation skills
were better than Jennifer's. He imitated correctly 43% of
the attempted motor movements in the prebaseline imi-
tation assessment.
This study highlights the importance of individual
analyses and exploring the possible influence of variables
not manipulated during the study. In discussing the
study's results, Tincani (2004) noted that
For learners without hand-motor imitation skills, includ-
ing many children with autism, PECS training may be
more appropriate, at least in terms of initial mand acqui-
sition. Jennifer had weak hand-motor imitation skills
prior to intervention and learned picture exchange more
rapidly than sign language. For learners who have mod-
erate hand-motor imitation skills, sign language training
may be equally, if not more, appropriate. Carl had mod-
erate hand-motor imitation skills prior to intervention
and learned sign language more rapidly than picture ex-
change. (p. 160)
Advantages of the Alternating
Treatments Design
The alternating treatments design offers numerous ad-
vantages for evaluating and comparing two or more in-
dependent variables. Most of the benefits cited here were
described by Ulman and Sulzer-Azaroff (1975), who are
credited with first bringing the rationale and possibilities
of the alternating treatments design to the attention of the
applied behavior analysis community.

Does Not Require Treatment Withdrawal
A major advantage of the alternating treatments design is
that it does not require the investigator to withdraw a
seemingly effective treatment to demonstrate a functional
relation. Reversing behavioral improvements raises eth-
ical issues that can be avoided with the alternating treat-
ments design. Regardless of ethical concerns, however,
administrators and teachers may be more likely to accept
an alternating treatments design over a reversal design even
when one of the alternating treatments is a no-treatment
control condition. "It would appear that a return to base-
line conditions every other day or every third day is not
as disagreeable to a teacher as is first establishing a high
level of desirable behavior for a prolonged period, and
then reinstating the baseline behaviors" (Ulman & Sulzer-
Azaroff, 1975, p. 385).
Speed of Comparison
The experimental comparison of two or more treatments
can often be made quickly with the alternating treatments
design. In one study an alternating treatments design en-
abled the superiority of one treatment over another in in-
creasing the cooperative behavior of a 6-year-old boy to
be determined after only 4 days (McCullough, Cornell,
McDaniel, & Mueller, 1974). The alternating treatments
design's ability to produce useful results quickly is a
major reason that it is the basic experimental tactic used
in functional behavior analysis.
When the effects of different treatments become ap-
parent early in an alternating treatments design, the in-
vestigator can then switch to programming only the most
effective treatment. The efficiency of the alternating treat-
ments design can leave a researcher with meaningful data
even when an experiment must be terminated early
(Ulman & Sulzer-Azaroff, 1975). A reversal or multiple
baseline design, on the other hand, must be carried
through to completion to show a functional relation.

Minimizes Irreversibility Problem
Some behaviors, even though they have been brought
about or modified by the application of the intervention,
do not return to baseline levels when the intervention is
withdrawn and thereby resist analysis with an A-B-A-B
design. However, rapidly alternating treatment and no-
treatment (baseline) conditions may reveal differences in
responding between the two conditions, especially early
in an experiment before responding in the no-treatment
condition begins to approximate the level of responding
in the treatment condition.

Minimizes Sequence Effects
An alternating treatments design, when properly con-
ducted, minimizes the extent to which an experiment's
results are confounded by sequence effects. Sequence ef-
fects pose a threat to the internal validity of any experi-
ment, but especially to those involving multiple
treatments. The concern over sequence effects can be
summed up by this simple question: Would the results
have been the same if the sequence of treatments had
been different? Sequence effects can be extremely diffi-
cult to control in experiments using reversal or multiple
tactics to compare two or more independent variables
because each experimental condition must remain in
effect for a fairly long period of time, thereby produc-
ing a specific sequence of events. However, in an al-
ternating treatments design, the independent variables
are rapidly alternated with one another in a random fash-
ion that produces no particular sequence. Also, each treat-
ment is in effect for short periods of time, reducing the
likelihood of carryover effects (O'Brien, 1968). The abil-
ity to minimize sequence effects makes the alternating
treatments design a powerful tool for achieving complex
behavior analyses.

Can Be Used with Unstable Data
Determining functional behavior-environment relations
in the presence of unstable data presents a serious prob-
lem for the applied behavior analyst. Using steady state
responding to predict, verify, and replicate behavioral
changes is the foundation of experimental reasoning in
behavior analysis (Sidman, 1960). Obtaining stable base-
line responding, however, is extremely difficult with
many socially important behaviors of interest to applied
behavior analysts. Merely providing a subject with re-
peated opportunities to emit a target response can result
in gradually improved performance. Although practice
effects are worthy of empirical investigation because of
their applied and scientific importance (Greenwood,
Delquadri, & Hall, 1984; Johnston & Pennypacker,
1993a), the unstable baselines they create pose problems
for the analysis of intervention variables. The changing
levels of task difficulty inherent in moving through a cur-
riculum of progressively more complex material also
make obtaining steady state responding for many acade-
mic behaviors difficult.
Because the different treatment conditions are alter-
nated rapidly in an alternating treatments design, because
each treatment is presented many times throughout each
time period encompassed by the study, and because no
single condition is present for any considerable length of
time, it can be presumed that any effects of practice,
change in task difficulty, maturation, or other historical
variables will be equally represented in each treatment
condition and therefore will not differentially affect any
one condition more or less than the others. For example,
even though each of two data paths representing a stu-
dent's reading performance under two different teaching
procedures shows variable and ascending trends that
might be due to practice effects and uneven curriculum
materials, any consistent separation and vertical distance
between the data paths can be attributed to differences in
the teaching procedures.
Can Be Used to Assess Generalization of Effects
By alternating various conditions of interest, an experi-
menter can continually assess the degree of generalization
of behavior change from an effective treatment to other
conditions of interest. For example, by alternating dif-
ferent therapists in the final phase of their study of pica
behavior, N. Singh and Winton (1985) were able to de-
termine the extent to which the overcorrection treatment
was effective when presented by different persons.
Intervention Can Begin Immediately
Although determining the preintervention level of re-
sponding is generally preferred, the clinical necessity of
immediately attempting to change some behaviors pre-
cludes repeated measurement in the absence of interven-
tion. When necessary, an alternating treatments design
can be used without an initial baseline phase.
Considering the Appropriateness
of the Alternating Treatments
Design
The advantages of the alternating treatments design are
significant. As with any experimental tactic, however, the
alternating treatments design presents certain disadvan-
tages and leaves unanswered certain questions that can be
addressed only by additional experimentation.
Multiple Treatment Interference
The fundamental feature of the alternating treatments de-
sign is the rapid alternation of two or more independent
variables irrespective of the behavioral measures obtained
under each treatment. Although the rapid alternation min-
imizes sequence effects and reduces the time required to
compare treatments, it raises the important question of
whether the effects observed under any of the alternated
treatments would be the same if each treatment were im-
plemented alone. Multiple treatment interference refers
to the confounding effects of one treatment on a subject's
behavior being influenced by the effects of another treat-
ment administered in the same study.
Multiple treatment interference must always be sus-
pected in the alternating treatments design (Barlow &
Hayes, 1979; McGonigle, Rojahn, Dixon, & Strain,
1987). However, by following the alternating treatments
phase with a phase in which only the most effective treat-
ment condition is in effect, the experimenter can assess the
effects of that treatment when administered in isolation.
Unnatural Nature of Rapidly
Alternating Treatments
The rapid back-and-forth switching of treatments does
not reflect the typical manner in which clinical and edu-
cational interventions are applied. From an instructional
perspective, rapid switching of treatments can be viewed
as artificial and undesirable. In most instances, however,
the quick comparison of treatments offered by the alter-
nating treatments design compensates for concerns about
its contrived nature. The concern of whether participants
might suffer detrimental effects from the rapid alternation
of conditions is an empirical question that can be deter-
mined only by experimentation. Also, it is helpful for
practitioners to remember that one purpose of the alter-
nating treatments design is to identify an effective inter-
vention as quickly as possible so that the participant does
not have to endure ineffective instructional approaches
or treatments that would delay progress toward educa-
tional goals. On balance, the advantages of rapidly
switching treatments to identify an efficacious interven-
tion outweigh any undesirable effects that such manipu-
lation may cause.

Limited Capacity
Although the alternating treatments design enables an el-
egant, scientifically sound method for comparing the dif-
ferential effects of two or more treatments, it is not an
open-ended design in which an unlimited number of treat-
ments can be compared. Although alternating treatments
designs with up to five conditions have been reported
(e. g., Didden, Prinson, & Sigafoos, 2000), in most situ-
ations a maximum of four different conditions (one of
which may be a no-treatment control condition) can be
compared effectively within a single phase of an alter-
nating treatments design, and in many instances only two
different treatments can be accommodated. To separate
the effects of each treatment condition from any effects
that may be caused by aspects of the alternating treat-
ments design, each treatment must be carefully counter-
balanced across all potentially relevant aspects of its
administration (e.g., time of day, order of presentation,
settings, therapists). In many applied settings the logistics
of counterbalancing and delivering more than two or three
treatments would be cumbersome and would cause the
experiment to require too many sessions to complete.
Also, too many competing treatments can decrease the
subject's ability to discriminate between treatments,
thereby reducing the design's effectiveness.

Selection of Treatments
Theoretically, although an alternating treatments design
can be used to compare the effects of any two discrete
treatments, in reality the design is more limited. To en-
hance the probability of discrimination between condi-
tions (i.e., obtaining reliable, measurable differences in
behavior), the treatments should embody significant dif-
ferences from one to the other. For example, an investi-
gator using an alternating treatments design to study the
effects of group size on students' academic performance
during instruction might include conditions of 4, 10, and
20 students. Alternating conditions of 6, 7, and 8 stu-
dents, however, is less likely to reveal a functional rela-
tion between group size and performance. However, a
treatment condition should not be selected for inclusion
in an alternating treatments design only because it might
yield a data path that is easily differentiated from that of
another condition. The applied in applied behavior analy-
sis encompasses the nature of treatment conditions as
well as the nature of behaviors investigated (Wolf, 1978).
An important consideration in selecting treatment con-
ditions should be the extent to which they are represen-
tative of current practices or practices that could
conceivably be implemented. For example, although an
experiment comparing the effects of 5 minutes, 10 min-
utes, and 30 minutes of math homework per school night
on math achievement might be useful, a study comparing
the effects of 5 minutes, 10 minutes, and 3 hours of math
homework per night probably would not be. Even if such
a study found 3 hours of nightly math homework ex-
tremely effective in raising students' achievement in math,
few teachers, parents, administrators, or students would
carry out a program of 3 hours of nightly homework for
a single content area.
Another consideration is that some interventions may
not produce important behavior change unless and until
they have been implemented consistently over a contin-
uous period of time.
When a multielement baseline design is employed, over-
lapping data do not necessarily rule out the possible effi-
cacy of an experimental procedure. The session-by-
session alternation of conditions might obscure effects
that could be observed if the same condition was pre-
sented during several consecutive sessions. It is there-
fore possible that a given treatment may prove to be
effective with a reversal or multiple baseline design,
but not with a multielement baseline design. (Ulman
& Sulzer-Azaroff, 1975, p. 382)
The suspicion that a given treatment may be effective
if it is presented in isolation for an extended period is an
empirical question that can be explored properly only
through experimentation. At one level, if extended ap-
plication of a single treatment results in behavioral im-
provement, the practitioner might be satisfied, and no
further action would be needed. However, the prac-
titioner-researcher who is interested in determining
experimental control might return to an alternating
treatments design and compare the performance of the
single treatment with that of another intervention.
Summary
Reversal Design
1. The reversal tactic (A-B-A) entails repeated measurement
of behavior in a given setting during three consecutive
phases: (a) a baseline phase (absence of the independent
variable), (b) a treatment phase (introduction of the inde-
pendent variable), and (c) a return to baseline conditions
(withdrawal of the independent variable).
2. The reversal design is strengthened tremendously by rein-
troducing the independent variable in the form of an
A-B-A-B design. The A-B-A-B design is the most straight-
forward and generally most powerful intrasubject design
for demonstrating functional relations.
Variations of the A-B-A-B Design
3. Extending the A-B-A-B design with repeated reversals
may provide a more convincing demonstration of a func-
tional relation than a design with one reversal.
4. The B-A-B reversal design can be used with target be-
haviors for which an initial baseline phase is inappropri-
ate or not possible for ethical or practical reasons.
5. Multiple treatment reversal designs use the reversal tactic
to compare the effects of two or more experimental con-
ditions to baseline and/or to one another.
6. Multiple treatment reversal designs are particularly sus-
ceptible to confounding by sequence effects.
7. The NCR reversal technique enables the isolation and
analysis of the contingent aspect of reinforcement.
8. Reversal techniques incorporating DRO and DRI/DRA
control conditions can also be used to demonstrate the ef-
fects of contingent reinforcement.
Considering the Appropriateness of the Reversal Design
9. An experimental design based on the reversal tactic is in-
effective in evaluating the effects of a treatment variable
that, by its very nature, cannot be withdrawn once it has
been presented (e.g., instruction, modeling).
10. Once improved, some behaviors will not reverse to base-
line levels even though the independent variable has been
withdrawn. Such behavioral irreversibility precludes ef-
fective use of the reversal design.
11. Legitimate social, educational, and ethical concerns are
often raised over withdrawing a seemingly effective treat-
ment variable to provide scientific verification of its func-
tion in changing behavior.
12. Sometimes very brief reversal phases, or even one-session
baseline probes, can demonstrate believable experimental
control.
Alternating Treatments Design
13. The alternating treatments design compares two or more
distinct treatments (i.e., independent variables) while their
effects on the target behavior (i.e., dependent variable)
are measured
14. In an alternating treatments design, each successive data
point for a specific treatment plays three roles: it provides
(a) a basis for the prediction of future levels of responding
under that treatment, (b) potential verification of the pre-
vious prediction of performance under that treatment, and
(c) the opportunity for replication of previous effects pro-
duced by that treatment.
15. Experimental control is demonstrated in the alternating
treatments design when the data paths for two different
treatments show little or no overlap.
16. The extent of any differential effects produced by two treat-
ments is determined by the vertical distance between their re-
spective data paths and quantified by the vertical axis scale.
Variations of the Alternating Treatments Design
17. Common variations of the alternating treatments design
include the following:
• Single-phase alternating treatments design without a no-
treatment control condition
• Single-phase design with a no-treatment control condition
• Two-phase design: initial baseline phase followed by
the alternating treatments phase
• Three-phase design: initial baseline phase followed
by the alternating treatments phase and a final best
treatment phase
Advantages of the Alternating Treatments Design
18. Advantages of the alternating treatments design include
the following:
• Does not require treatment withdrawal.
• Quickly compares the relative effectiveness of treatments.
• Minimizes the problem of irreversibility.
• Minimizes sequence effects.
• Can be used with unstable data patterns.
• Can be used to assess generalization of effects.
• Intervention can begin immediately.
Considering the Appropriateness of the Alternating
Treatments Design
19. The alternating treatments design is susceptible to multi-
ple treatment interference. However, by following the al-
ternating treatments phase with a phase in which only one
treatment is administered, the experimenter can assess the
effects of that treatment in isolation.
20. The rapid back-and-forth switching of treatments does not
reflect the typical manner in which interventions are ap-
plied and may be viewed as artificial and undesirable.
21. An alternating treatments phase is usually limited to a
maximum of four different treatment conditions.
22. The alternating treatments design is most effective in re-
vealing the differential effects of treatment conditions that
differ significantly from one another.
23. The alternating treatments design is not effective for as-
sessing the effects of an independent variable that pro-
duces important changes in behavior only when it is
consistently administered over a continuous period of time.