Definition and Characteristics of Applied Behavior Analysis

Key Terms
applied behavior analysis (ABA) explanatory fiction philosophic doubt
behaviorism functional relation radical behaviorism
determinism hypothetical construct replication
empiricism mentalism science
experiment methodological behaviorism
experimental analysis of behavior parsimony
(EAB)

Applied behavior analysis is a science devoted
to the understanding and improvement of
human behavior. But other fields have similar
intent. What sets applied behavior analysis apart? The
answer lies in its focus, goals, and methods. Applied be-
havior analysts focus on objectively defined behaviors of
social significance; they intervene to improve the behav-
iors under study while demonstrating a reliable relation-
ship between their interventions and the behavioral
improvements; and they use the methods of scientific in-
quiry-objective description, quantification, and con-
trolled experimentation. In short, applied behavior
analysis, or ABA, is a scientific approach for discovering
environmental variables that reliably influence socially
significant behavior and for developing a technology of
behavior change that takes practical advantage of those
discoveries.
This chapter provides a brief outline of the history
and development of behavior analysis, discusses the phi-
losophy that underlies the science, and identifies the
defining dimensions and characteristics of applied be-
havior analysis. Because applied behavior analysis is an
applied science, we begin with an overview of some pre-
cepts fundamental to all scientific disciplines.
Some Basic Characteristics
and a Definition of Science
Used properly, the word science refers to a systematic
approach for seeking and organizing knowledge about
the natural world. Before offering a definition of science,
we discuss the purpose of science and the basic assump-
tions and attitudes that guide the work of all scientists, ir-
respective of their fields of study.
Purpose of Science
The overall goal of science is to achieve a thorough un-
derstanding of the phenomena under study— socially im-
portant behaviors, in the case of applied behavior
analysis. Science differs from other sources of know-
edge or ways we obtain knowledge about the world
around us (e.g., contemplation, common sense, logic, au-
thority figures, religious or spiritual beliefs, political cam-
paigns, advertisements, testimonials). Science seeks to
discover nature's truths. Although it is frequently mis-
used, science is not a tool for validating the cherished or
preferred versions of "the truth" held by any group, cor-
poration, government, or institution. Therefore, scientific
knowledge must be separated from any personal, politi-
cal, economic, or other reasons for which it was sought.
Different types of scientific investigations yield
knowledge that enables one or more of three levels of un-
derstanding: description, prediction, and control. Each
level of understanding contributes to the scientific knowl-
edge base of a given field.
Description
Systematic observation enhances the understanding of a
given phenomenon by enabling scientists to describe it
accurately. Descriptive knowledge consists of a collec-
tion of facts about the observed events that can be quan-
tified, classified, and examined for possible relations with
other known facts—a necessary and important activity
for any scientific discipline. The knowledge obtained
from descriptive studies often suggests possible hy-
potheses or questions for additional research.
For example, White (1975) reported the results of
observing the "natural rates" of approval (verbal praise or
encouragement) and disapproval (criticisms, reproach)
by 104 classroom teachers in grades 1 to 12. Two major
findings were that (a) the rates of teacher praise dropped
with each grade level, and (b) in every grade after second,
the rate at which teachers delivered statements of disap-
proval to students exceeded the rate of teacher approval.
The results of this descriptive study helped to stimulate
dozens of subsequent studies aimed at discovering the
factors responsible for the disappointing findings or at
increasing teachers' rates of praise (e.g., Alber, Heward,
& Hippler, 1999; Martens, Hiralall, & Bradley, 1997;
Sutherland, Wehby, & Yoder, 2002; Van Acker, Grant, &
Henry, 1996).
Prediction
A second level of scientific understanding occurs when
repeated observations reveal that two events consistently
covary with each other. That is, in the presence of one
event (e.g., approaching winter) another event occurs (or
fails to occur) with some specified probability (e.g., cer-
tain birds fly south). When systematic covariation be-
tween two events is found, this relationship-termed a
correlation— can be used to predict the relative proba-
bility that one event will occur, based on the presence of
the other event.
Because no variables are manipulated or controlled
by the researcher, correlational studies cannot demon-
strate whether any of the observed variables are respon-
sible for the changes in the other variable(s), and no such
relations should be inferred (Johnston & Pennypacker,
1993a). For example, although a strong correlation ex-
ists between hot weather and an increased incidence of
drowning deaths, we should not assume that a hot and
humid day causes anyone to drown. Hot weather also
correlates with other factors, such as an increased num-
ber of people (both swimmers and nonswimmers) seeking
relief in the water, and many instances of drowning have
been found to be a function of factors such as the use of
alcohol or drugs, the relative swimming skills of the vic-
tims, strong riptides, and the absence of supervision by
lifeguards.
Results of correlational studies can, however, sug-
gest the possibility of causal relations, which can then be
explored in later studies. The most common type of cor-
relational study reported in the applied behavior analysis
literature compares the relative rates or conditional prob-
abilities of two or more observed (but not manipulated)
variables (e.g., Atwater & Morris, 1988; Symons, Hoch,
Dahl, & McComas, 2003; Thompson & Iwata, 2001).
For example, McKerchar and Thompson (2004) found
correlations between problem behavior exhibited by 14
preschool children and the following consequent events:
teacher attention (100% of the children), presentation of
some material or item to the child (79% of the children),
and escape from instructional tasks (33% of the children).
The results of this study not only provide empirical val-
idation for the social consequences typically used in clin-
ical settings to analyze the variables maintaining
children's problem behavior, but also increase confidence
in the prediction that interventions based on the findings
from such assessments will be relevant to the conditions
that occur naturally in preschool classrooms (Iwata et al.,
1994). In addition, by revealing the high probabilities
with which teachers responded to problem behavior in
ways that are likely to maintain and strengthen it, Mc-
Kerchar and Thompson's findings also point to the need
to train teachers in more effective ways to respond to
problem behavior.
Control
The ability to predict with a certain degree of confidence
is a valuable and useful result of science; prediction en-
ables preparation. However, the greatest potential bene-
fits from science can be derived from the third, and
highest, level of scientific understanding-control. Evi-
dence of the kinds of control that can been derived from
scientific findings in the physical and biological sciences
surrounds us in the everyday technologies we take for
granted: pasteurized milk and the refrigerators we store
it in; flu shots and the automobiles we drive to go get
them; aspirin and the televisions that bombard us with
news and advertisements about the drug.
Functional relations, the primary products of basic
and applied behavior analytic research, provide the kind
of scientific understanding that is most valuable and use-
ful to the development of a technology for changing
behavior. A functional relation exists when a well-
controlled experiment reveals that a specific change in
one event (the dependent variable) can reliably be pro-
duced by specific manipulations of another event (the
independent variable), and that the change in the depen-
dent variable was unlikely to be the result of other extra-
neous factors (confounding variables).
Johnston and Pennypacker (1980) described func-
tional relations as *the ultimate product of a natural sci-
entific investigation of the relation between behavior and
its determining variables" (p. 16).
Such a "co-relation" is expressed as y = f(x), where x is
the independent variable or argument of the function,
and y is the dependent variable. In order to determine if
an observed relation is truly functional, it is necessary to
demonstrate the operation of the values of x in isolation
and show that they are sufficient for the production of
y. ... [However, a more powerful relation exists if ne-
cessity can be shown (that y occurs only if x occurs). The
most complete and elegant form of empirical inquiry in-
volves applying the experimental method to identifying
functional relations. (Johnston & Pennypacker, 1993a,
p. 239)
The understanding gained by the scientific discovery
of functional relations is the basis of applied technologies
in all fields. Almost all of the research studies cited in this
text are experimental analyses that have demonstrated or
discovered a functional relation between a target behav-
ior and one or more environmental variables. However, it
is important to understand that functional relations are
also correlations (Cooper, 2005), and that:
In fact, all we ever really know is that two events are
related or "co-related" in some way. To say that one
"causes" another is to say that one is solely the result of
the other. To know this, it is necessary to know that no
other factors are playing a contributing role. This is vir-
tually impossible to know because it requires identifying
all possible such factors and then showing that they are
not relevant. (Johnston & Pennypacker, 1993a, p. 240)
Attitudes of Science
Science is first of all a set of attitudes.
—B. F. Skinner (1953, p. 12)
The definition of science lies not in test tubes, spec-
trometers, or electron accelerators, but in the behavior of
scientists. To begin to understand any science, we need to
look past the apparatus and instrumentation that are most
readily apparent and examine what scientists do.' The
pursuit of knowledge can properly be called science when
it is carried out according to general methodological pre-
cepts and expectations that define science. Although there
is no "scientific method" in the sense of a prescribed set
of steps or rules that must be followed, all scientists share
a fundamental assumption about the nature of events that
are amenable to investigation by science, general notions
about basic strategy, and perspectives on how to view
their findings. These attitudes of science-determinism,
empiricism, experimentation, replication, parsimony, and
philosophic doubt-constitute a set of overriding as-
sumptions and values that guide the work of all scientists
(Whaley & Surratt, 1968).
Determinism
Science is predicated on the assumption of determinism.
Scientists presume that the universe, or at least that part
of it they intend to probe with the methods of science, is
a lawful and orderly place in which all phenomena occur
as the result of other events. In other words, events do
not just happen willy-nilly; they are related in system-
atic ways to other factors, which are themselves physical
phenomena amenable to scientific investigation.
If the universe were governed by accidentalism, a
philosophical position antithetical to determinism that
holds that events occur by accident or without cause, or
by fatalism, the belief that events are predetermined, the
scientific discovery and technological use of functional
relations to improve things would be impossible.
If we are to use the methods of science in the field of
human affairs, we must assume behavior is lawful and
determined. We must expect to discover what a man
does is the result of specifiable conditions and that once
these conditions have been discovered, we can anticipate
and to some extent determine his actions. (Skinner,
1953, р. 6)
Determinism plays a pivotal dual role in the conduct
of scientific practice: It is at once a philosophical stance
that does not lend itself to proof and the confirmation that
is sought by each experiment. In other words, the scien-
tist first assumes lawfulness and then proceeds to look
for lawful relations (Delprato & Midgley, 1992).
Empiricism
Scientific knowledge is built on, above all, empiricism—
the practice of objective observation of the phenomena of
interest. Objectivity in this sense means "independent of
the individual prejudices, tastes, and private opinions
of the scientist. ... Results of empirical methods are ob-
jective in that they are open to anyone's observation and
do not depend on the subjective belief of the individual
scientist" (Zuriff, 1985, p. 9).
In the prescientific era, as well as in nonscientific
and pseudoscientific activities today, knowledge was (and
is) the product of contemplation, speculation, personal
opinion, authority, and the "obvious" logic of common
sense. The scientist's empirical attitude, however, de-
mands objective observation based on thorough descrip-
tion, systematic and repeated measurement, and precise
quantification of the phenomena of interest.
As in every scientific field, empiricism is the fore-
most rule in the science of behavior. Every effort to un-
derstand, predict, and improve behavior hinges on the
behavior analyst's ability to completely define, system-
atically observe, and accurately and reliably measure oc-
currences and nonoccurrences of the behavior of interest.
Experimentation
Experimentation is the basic strategy of most sciences.
Whaley and Surratt (1968) used the following anecdote
to introduce the need for conducting experiments.
A man who lived in a suburban dwelling area was sur-
prised one evening to see his neighbor bow to the four
winds, chant a strange melody, and dance around his
front lawn beating a small drum. After witnessing the
same ritual for over a month, the man became over-
whelmed with curiosity and decided to look into the
matter.
"Why do you go through this same ritual each
evening?" the man asked his neighbor.
"It keeps my house safe from tigers," the neighbor
replied.
"Good grief!" the man said. "Don't you know there
isn't a tiger within a thousand miles of here?"
"Yeah," the neighbor smiled. "Sure works, doesn't
it!" (pp. 23-2 to 23-3)
When events are observed to covary or occur in close
temporal sequence, a functional relation may exist, but
other factors may be responsible for the observed values
of the dependent variable. To investigate the possible ex-
istence of a functional relation, an experiment (or better,
a series of experiments) must be performed in which the
factor(s) suspected of having causal status are systemat-
ically controlled and manipulated while the effects on
the event under study are carefully observed. In dis-
cussing the meaning of the term experimental, Dinsmoor
(2003) noted that
two measures of behavior may be found to covary at a
statistically significant level, but it is not thereby made
clear which factor is the cause and which is the effect, or
indeed whether the relations between the two is not the
product of a third, confounded factor, with which both
of them happened to covary. Suppose, for example, it is
found that students with good grades have more dates
than those with lower grades. Does this imply that high
grades make people socially attractive? That dating is
the royal road to academic success? That it pays to be
smart? Or that financial security and free time contribute
both to academic and to social success? (p. 152)
Reliably predicting and controlling any phenomena,
including the presence of tigers in one's backyard, re-
quires the identification and manipulation of the factors
that cause those phenomena to act as they do. One way
that the individual described previously could use the ex-
perimental method to evaluate the effectiveness of his rit-
ual would be to first move to a neighborhood in which
tigers are regularly observed and then systematically ma-
nipulate the use of his antitiger ritual (e.g., one week on,
one week off, one week on) while observing and record-
ing the presence of tigers under the ritual and no-ritual
conditions.
The experimental method is a method for isolating the
relevant variables within a pattern of events.... [When
the experimental method is employed, it is possible to
change one factor at a time (independent variable) while
leaving all other aspects of the situation the same, and
then to observe what effect this change has on the target
behavior (dependent variable). Ideally, a functional rela-
tion may be obtained. Formal techniques of experimen-
tal control are designed to make sure that the conditions
being compared are otherwise the same. Use of the ex-
perimental method serves as a necessary condition (sine
quo non) to distinguish the experimental analysis of be-
havior from other methods of investigation. (Dinsmoor,
2003, р. 152)
Thus, an experiment is a carefully conducted com-
parison of some measure of the phenomenon of interest
(the dependent variable) under two or more different con-
ditions in which only one factor at a time (the indepen-
dent variable) differs from one condition to another.
Replication
The results of a single experiment, no matter how well the
study was designed and conducted and no matter how
clear and impressive the findings, are never sufficient to
earn an accepted place among the scientific knowledge
base of any field. Although the data from a single exper-
iment have value in their own right and cannot be dis-
counted, only after an experiment has been replicated a
number of times with the same basic pattern of results
do scientists gradually become convinced of the findings.
Replication— the repeating of experiments (as well
as repeating independent variable conditions within ex-
periments)— "pervades every nook and cranny of the ex-
perimental method" (Johnston & Pennypacker, 1993a,
p. 244). Replication is the primary method with which
scientists determine the reliability and usefulness of their
findings and discover their mistakes (Johnston & Penny-
packer, 1980; 1993a; Sidman, 1960). Replication-not
the infallibility or inherent honesty of scientists-is the
primary reason science is a self-correcting enterprise that
eventually gets it right (Skinner, 1953).
How many times must an experiment be repeated
with the same results before the scientific community ac-
cepts the findings? There is no set number of replications
required, but the greater the importance of the findings for
either theory or practice, the greater the number of repli-
cations to be conducted.
Parsimony
One dictionary definition of parsimony is great frugal-
ity, and in a special way this connotation accurately de-
scribes the behavior of scientists. As an attitude of
science, parsimony requires that all simple, logical ex-
planations for the phenomenon under investigation be
ruled out, experimentally or conceptually, before more
complex or abstract explanations are considered. Parsi-
monious interpretations help scientists fit their findings
within the field's existing knowledge base. A fully par-
simonious interpretation consists only of those elements
that are necessary and sufficient to explain the phenom-
enon at hand. The attitude of parsimony is so critical to
scientific explanations that it is sometimes referred to as
the Law of Parsimony (Whaley & Surratt, 1968), a "law"
derived from Occam's Razor, credited to William of
Occam (1285-1349), who stated: "One should not in-
crease, beyond what is necessary, the number of entities
required to explain anything" (Mole, 2003). In other
words, given a choice between two competing and com-
pelling explanations for the same phenomenon, one
should shave off extraneous variables and choose the sim-
plest explanation, the one that requires the fewest
assumptions.
Philosophic Doubt
The attitude of philosophic doubt requires the scientist
to continually question the truthfulness of what is re-
garded as fact. Scientific knowledge must always be
viewed as tentative. Scientists must constantly be will-
ing to set aside their most cherished beliefs and findings
and replace them with the knowledge derived from new
discoveries.
Good scientists maintain a healthy level of skepti-
cism. Although being skeptical of others' research may be
easy, a more difficult but critical characteristic of scien-
tists is that they remain open to the possibility-as well
as look for evidence-that their own findings or inter-
pretations are wrong. As Oliver Cromwell (1650) stated
in another context: "I beseech you ... think it possible
you may be mistaken." For the true scientist, "new find-
ings are not problems; they are opportunities for further
investigation and expanded understanding" (Todd & Mor-
ris, 1993, p. 1159).
Practitioners should be as skeptical as researchers.
The skeptical practitioner not only requires scientific ev-
idence before implementing a new practice, but also eval-
uates continually its effectiveness once the practice has
been implemented. Practitioners must be particularly
skeptical of extraordinary claims made for the effective-
ness of new theories, therapies, or treatments (Jacobson,
Foxx, & Mulick, 2005; Maurice, 2006).
Claims that sound too good to be true are usually just
that. ... Extraordinary claims require extraordinary evi-
dence. (Sagan, 1996; Shermer, 1997)
What constitutes extraordinary evidence? In the
strictest sense, and the sense that should be employed
when evaluating claims of educational effectiveness, ev-
idence is the outcome of the application of the scientific
method to test the effectiveness of a claim, a theory, or a
practice. The more rigorously the test is conducted, the
more often the test is replicated, the more extensively
the test is corroborated, the more extraordinary the evi-
dence. Evidence becomes extraordinary when it is extra-
ordinarily well tested. (Heward & Silvestri, 2005,
p. 209)
We end our discussion of philosophic doubt with two
pieces of advice, one from Carl Sagan, the other from
B. F. Skinner: "The question is not whether we like the
conclusion that emerges out of a train of reasoning, but
whether the conclusion follows from the premise or start-
ing point and whether that premise is true" (Sagan, 1996,
p. 210). "Regard no practice as immutable. Change and
be ready to change again. Accept no eternal verity. Ex-
periment" (Skinner, 1979, p. 346).

Other Important Attitudes and Values
The six attitudes of science that we have examined are
necessary features of science and provide an important
context for understanding applied behavior analysis.
However, the behavior of most productive and success-
ful scientists is also characterized by qualities such as
thoroughness, curiosity, perseverance, diligence, ethics,
and honesty. Good scientists acquire these traits because
behaving in such ways has proven beneficial to the
progress of science.
A Definition of Science
There is no universally accepted, standard definition of
science. We offer the following definition as one that en-
compasses the previously discussed purposes and atti-
tudes of science, irrespective of the subject matter.
Science is a systematic approach to the understanding of
natural phenomena—as evidenced by description, pre-
diction, and control-that relies on determinism as its
fundamental assumption, empiricism as its prime direc-
tive, experimentation as its basic strategy, replication as
its necessary requirement for believability, parsimony as
its conservative value, and philosophic doubt as its guid-
ing conscience.
A Brief History
of the Development
of Behavior Analysis
Behavior analysis consists of three major branches. Be-
haviorism is the philosophy of the science of behavior,
basic research is the province of the experimental analy-
sis of behavior (EAB), and developing a technology for
improving behavior is the concern of applied behavior
analysis (ABA). Applied behavior analysis can be fully
understood only in the context of the philosophy and
basic research traditions and findings from which it
evolved and remains connected today. This section pro-
vides an elementary description of the basic tenets of be-
haviorism and outlines some of the major events that have
marked the development of behavior analysis? Table 1
lists major books, journals, and professional organiza-
tions that have contributed to the advancement of behav-
ior analysis since the 1930s.
Stimulus-Response Behaviorism
of Watson
Psychology in the early 1900s was dominated by the
study of states of consciousness, images, and other men-
tal processes. Introspection, the act of carefully observ-
ing one's own conscious thoughts and feelings, was a
primary method of investigation. Although the authors
of several texts in the first decade of the 20th century de-
fined psychology as the science of behavior (see Kazdin,
1978), John B. Watson is widely recognized as the
spokesman for a new direction in the field of psychology.
In his influential article, "Psychology as the Behaviorist
Views It," Watson (1913) wrote:
Psychology as the behaviorist views it is a purely
objective experimental branch of natural science. Its
theoretical goal is the prediction and control of behavior.
Introspection forms no essential part of its methods, nor
is the scientific value of its data dependent upon the
readiness with which they lend themselves to interpreta-
tion in terms of consciousness. (p. 158)
Watson argued that the proper subject matter for psy-
chology was not states of mind or mental processes but
observable behavior. Further, the objective study of be-
havior as a natural science should consist of direct ob-
servation of the relationships between environmental
stimuli (S) and the responses (R) they evoke. Watsonian
behaviorism thus became known as stimulus-response
(S-R) psychology. Although there was insufficient sci-
entific evidence to support S-R psychology as a workable
explanation for most behavior, Watson was confident that
his new behaviorism would indeed lead to the prediction
and control of human behavior and that it would allow
practitioners to improve performance in areas such as ed-
ucation, business, and law. Watson (1924) made bold
claims concerning human behavior, as illustrated in this
famous quotation:
Give me a dozen healthy infants, well-formed, and my
own specified world to bring them up in and I'll guaran-
tee to take any one at random and train him to become
any type of specialist I might select-doctor, lawyer,
artist, merchant-chief and, yes, even beggar-man and
thief, regardless of his talents, penchants, tendencies,
abilities, vocations, and race of his ancestors. I am going
beyond my facts and I admit it, but so have the advo-
cates of the contrary and they have been doing it for
many thousands of years. (p. 104)
It is unfortunate that such extraordinary claims were
made, exaggerating the ability to predict and control
human behavior beyond the scientific knowledge avail-
able. The quotation just cited has been used to discredit
Watson and continues to be used to discredit behaviorism
in general, even though the behaviorism that underlies
contemporary behavior analysis is fundamentally differ-
ent from the S-R paradigm. Nevertheless, Watson's con-
tributions were of great significance: He made a strong
case for the study of behavior as a natural science on a par
with the physical and biological sciences.
Experimental Analysis of Behavior
The experimental branch of behavior analysis formally
began in 1938 with the publication of B. F. Skinner's The
Behavior of Organisms (1938/1966). The book summa-
rized Skinner's laboratory research conducted from 1930
to 1937 and brought into perspective two kinds of be-
havior: respondent and operant.
Respondent behavior is reflexive behavior as in the
tradition of Ivan Pavlov (1927/1960). Respondents are
elicited, or "brought out," by stimuli that immediately
precede them. The antecedent stimulus (e.g., bright light)
and the response it elicits (e.g., pupil constriction) form
a functional unit called a reflex. Respondent behaviors
are essentially involuntary and occur whenever the elic-
iting stimulus is presented.
Skinner was "interested in giving a scientific account
of all behavior, including that which Descartes had set
aside as 'willed' and outside the reach of science" (Glenn,
Ellis, & Greenspoon, 1992, p. 1330). But, like other psy-
chologists of the time, Skinner found that the S-R para-
digm could not explain a great deal of behavior, particularly
behaviors for which there were no apparent antecedent
causes in the environment. Compared to reflexive behav-
ior with its clear eliciting events, much of the behavior of
organisms appeared spontaneous or "voluntary." In an at-
tempt to explain the mechanisms responsible for "volun-
tary" behavior, other psychologists postulated mediating
variables inside the organism in the form of hypothetical
constructs such as cognitive processes, drives, and free
will. Skinner took a different tack. Instead of creating hyp-
othetical constructs, presumed but unobserved entities
that could not be manipulated in an experiment, Skinner
continued to look in the environment for the determinants
of behavior that did not have apparent antecedent causes
(Kimball, 2002; Palmer, 1998).
He did not deny that physiological variables played a
role in determining behavior. He merely felt that this
was the domain of other disciplines, and for his part, re-
mained committed to assessing the causal role of the en-
vironment. This decision meant looking elsewhere in
time. Through painstaking research, Skinner accumu-
lated significant, if counterintuitive, evidence that be-
havior is changed less by the stimuli that precede it
(though context is important) and more by the conse-
quences that immediately follow it (i.e., consequences
that are contingent upon it). The essential formulation
for this notion is S-R-S, otherwise known as the
three-term contingency. It did not replace the S-R
model-we still salivate, for instance, if we smell food
cooking when we are hungry. It did, however, account
for how the environment "selects" the great part of
learned behavior.
With the three-term contingency Skinner gave us a
new paradigm. He achieved something no less profound
for the study of behavior and learning than Bohr's model
of the atom or Mendel's model of the gene. (Kimball,
2002, p. 71)
Skinner called the second type of behavior operant
behavior.* Operant behaviors are not elicited by preced-
ing stimuli but instead are influenced by stimulus changes
that have followed the behavior in the past. Skinner's
most powerful and fundamental contribution to our un-
derstanding of behavior was his discovery and experi-
mental analyses of the effects of consequences on
behavior. The operant three-term contingency as the pri-
mary unit of analysis was a revolutionary conceptual
breakthrough (Glenn, Ellis, & Greenspoon, 1992).
Skinner (1938/1966) argued that the analysis of op-
erant behavior "with its unique relation to the environ-
ment presents a separate important field of investigation"
(p. 438). He named this new science the experimental
analysis of behavior and outlined the methodology for
its practice. Simply put, Skinner recorded the rate at
which a single subject (he initially used rats and later, pi-
geons) emitted a given behavior in a controlled and stan-
dardized experimental chamber.
The first set of data Skinner presented in The Be-
havior of Organisms was a graph that "gives a record of
the resulting change in behavior" (p. 67) when a food
pellet was delivered immediately after a rat pressed a
lever (see Figure 1). Skinner noted that the first three
times that food followed a response "had no observable
effect" but that "the fourth response was followed by an
appreciable increase in rate showing a swift acceleration
to a maximum" (pp. 67-68).
Skinner's investigative procedures evolved into an
elegant experimental approach that enabled clear and
powerful demonstrations of orderly and reliable func-
tional relations between behavior and various types of
environmental events.' By systematically manipulating
the arrangement and scheduling of stimuli that preceded
and followed behavior in literally thousands of labora-
tory experiments from the 1930s through the 1950s, Skin-
ner and his colleagues and students discovered and
verified the basic principles of operant behavior that con-
tinue to provide the empirical foundation for behavior
analysis today. Description of these principles of behav-
ior-general statements of functional relations between
behavior and environmental events—and tactics for
changing behavior derived from those principles consti-
tute a major portion of this text.
Skinner's Radical Behaviorism
In addition to being the founder of the experimental
analysis of behavior, B. F. Skinner wrote extensively on
the philosophy of that science.' Without question, Skin-
ner's writings have been the most influential both in guid-
ing the practice of the science of behavior and in
proposing the application of the principles of behavior
to new areas. In 1948 Skinner published Walden Two, a
fictional account of how the philosophy and principles
of behavior might be used in a utopian community. This
was followed by his classic text, Science and Human Be-
havior (1953), in which he speculated on how the prin-
ciples of behavior might be applied to complex human
behavior in areas such as education, religion, govern-
ment, law, and psychotherapy.
Much of Skinner's writing was devoted to the de-
velopment and explanation of his philosophy of behav-
iorism. Skinner began his book About Behaviorism
(1974) with these words:
Behaviorism is not the science of human behavior; it is
the philosophy of that science. Some of the questions it
asks are these: Is such a science really possible? Can it
account for every aspect of human behavior? What
methods can it use? Are its laws as valid as those of
physics and biology? Will it lead to a technology, and if
so, what role will it play in human affairs? (p. 1)
The behaviorism that Skinner pioneered differed sig-
nificantly (indeed, radically) from other psychological
theories, including other forms of behaviorism. Although
there were, and remain today, many psychological mod-
els and approaches to the study of behavior, mentalism
is the common denominator among most.
In general terms, mentalism may be defined as an ap-
proach to the study of behavior which assumes that a
mental or "inner" dimension exists that differs from a
behavioral dimension. This dimension is ordinarily re-
ferred to in terms of its neural, psychic, spiritual, subjec-
tive, conceptual, or hypothetical properties. Mentalism
further assumes that phenomena in this dimension either
directly cause or at least mediate some forms of behav-
ior, if not all. These phenomena are typically designated
as some sort of act, state, mechanism, process, or entity
that is causal in the sense of initiating or originating.
Mentalism regards concerns about the origin of these
phenomena as incidental at best. Finally, mentalism
holds that an adequate causal explanation of behavior
must appeal directly to the efficacy of these mental phe-
nomena. (Moore, 2003, pp. 181-182)
Hypothetical constructs and explanatory fictions are
the stock and trade of mentalism, which has dominated
Western intellectual thought and most psychological the-
ories (Descartes, Freud, Piaget), and it continues to do
so into the 21st century. Freud, for example, created a
complex mental world of hypothetical constructs-the
id, ego, and superego-that he contended were key to
understanding a person's actions.
Hypothetical constructs-"theoretical terms that
refer to a possibly existing, but at the moment unobserved
process or entity" (Moore, 1995, p. 36) - can neither be
observed nor experimentally manipulated (MacCorquo-
dale & Meehl, 1948; Zuriff, 1985). Free will, readiness,
innate releasers, language acquisition devices, storage
and retrieval mechanisms for memory, and information
processing are all examples of hypothetical constructs
that are inferred from behavior. Although Skinner (1953,
1974) clearly indicated that it is a mistake to rule out
events that influence our behavior because they are not
accessible to others, he believed that using presumed but
unobserved mentalistic fictions (i.e., hypothetical con-
structs) to explain the causes of behavior contributed
nothing to a functional account.
Consider a typical laboratory situation. A food-
deprived rat pushes a lever each time a light comes on
and receives food, but the rat seldom pushes the lever
when the light is off (and if it does, no food is delivered).
When asked to explain why the rat pushes the lever only
when the light is on, most will say that the rat has "made
the association" between the light being on and food
being delivered when the lever is pressed. As a result of
making that association, the animal now "knows" to press
the lever only when the light is on. Attributing the rat's be-
havior to a hypothetical cognitive process such as asso-
ciating or to something called "knowledge" adds nothing
to a functional account of the situation. First, the envi-
ronment (in this case, the experimenter) paired the light
and food availability for lever presses, not the rat. Second,
the knowledge or other cognitive process that is said to
explain the observed behavior is itself unexplained, which
begs for still more conjecture.
The "knowledge" that is said to account for the rat's
performance is an example of an explanatory fiction, a
fictitious variable that often is simply another name for
the observed behavior that contributes nothing to an un-
derstanding of the variables responsible for developing or
maintaining the behavior. Explanatory fictions are the key
ingredient in "a circular way of viewing the cause and ef-
fect of a situation" (Heron, Tincani, Peterson, & Miller,
2005, p. 274) that give a false sense of understanding
Turning from observed behavior to a fanciful inner
world continues unabated. Sometimes it is little more
than a linguistic practice. We tend to make nouns of ad-
jectives and verbs and must then find a place for the
things the nouns are said to represent. We say that a rope
is strong and before long we are speaking of its strength.
We call a particular kind of strength tensile, and then ex-
plain that the rope is strong because it possesses tensile
strength. The mistake is less obvious but more trouble-
some when matters are more complex....
Consider now a behavioral parallel. When a person
has been subject to mildly punishing consequences in
walking on a slippery surface, he may walk in a manner
we describe as cautious. It is then easy to say that he
walks with caution or that he shows caution. There is
no harm in this until we begin to say that he walks
carefully because of his caution. (Skinner, 1974, pp.
165-166, emphasis added)
Some believe that behaviorism rejects all events that
cannot be operationally defined by objective assessment.
Accordingly, Skinner is thought to have rejected all data
from his system that could not be independently verified
by other people (Moore, 1984). Moore (1985) called this
operational view "a commitment to truth by agreement"
(p. 59). This common view of the philosophy of behav-
iorism is limited; in reality, there are many kinds of be-
haviorism-structuralism, methodological behaviorism,
and forms of behaviorism that use cognitions as causal
factors (e.g., cognitive behavior modification and social
learning theory), in addition to the radical behaviorism of
Skinner.
Structuralism and methodological behaviorism do
reject all events that are not operationally defined by ob-
jective assessment (Skinner, 1974). Structuralists avoid
mentalism by restricting their activities to descriptions
of behavior. They make no scientific manipulations;
accordingly, they do not address questions of causal fac-
tors. Methodological behaviorists differ from the struc-
turalists by using scientific manipulations to search for
functional relations between events. Uncomfortable with
basing their science on unobservable phenomena, some
early behaviorists either denied the existence of "inner
variables" or considered them outside the realm of a sci-
entific account. Such an orientation is often referred to as
methodological behaviorism.
Methodological behaviorists also usually acknowl-
edge the existence of mental events but do not consider
them in the analysis of behavior (Skinner, 1974). Method-
ological behaviorists' reliance on public events, exclud-
ing private events, restricts the knowledge base of human
behavior and discourages innovation in the science of be-
havior. Methodological behaviorism is restrictive because
it ignores areas of major importance for an understand-
ing of behavior.
Contrary to popular opinion, Skinner did not object
to cognitive psychology's concern with private events
(i.e., events taking place "inside the skin") (Moore, 2000).
Skinner was the first behaviorist to view thoughts and
feelings (he called them "private events") as behavior to
be analyzed with the same conceptual and experimental
tools used to analyze publicly observable behavior, not as
phenomena or variables that exist within and operate via
principles of a separate mental world
Essentially, Skinner's behaviorism makes three major
assumptions regarding the nature of private events: (a)
Private events such as thoughts and feelings are behavior;
(b) behavior that takes place within the skin is distin-
guished from other ("public") behavior only by its inac-
cessibility; and (c) private behavior is influenced by (i.e.,
is a function of) the same kinds of variables as publicly
accessible behavior.
We need not suppose that events which take place within
an organism's skin have special properties for that rea-
son. A private event may be distinguished by its limited
accessibility but not, so far as we know, by any special
structure of nature. (Skinner, 1953, p. 257)
By incorporating private events into an overall con-
ceptual system of behavior, Skinner created a radical be-
haviorism that includes and seeks to understand all
human behavior. "What is inside the skin, and how do
we know about it? The answer is, I believe, the heart of
radical behaviorism" (Skinner, 1974, p. 218). The proper
connotations of the word radical in radical behaviorism
are far-reaching and thoroughgoing, connoting the phi-
losophy's inclusion of all behavior, public and private.
Radical is also an appropriate modifier for Skinner's form
of behaviorism because it represents a dramatic depar-
ture from other conceptual systems in calling for
probably the most drastic change ever proposed in our
way of thinking about man. It is almost literally a matter
of turning the explanation of behavior inside out. (Skin-
ner, 1974, p. 256)
Skinner and the philosophy of radical behaviorism
acknowledge the events on which fictions such as cog-
nitive processes are based. Radical behaviorism does not
restrict the science of behavior to phenomena that can be
detected by more than one person. In the context of rad-
ical behaviorism, the term observe implies "coming into
contact with" (Moore, 1984). Radical behaviorists con-
sider private events such as thinking or sensing the stim-
uli produced by a damaged tooth to be no different from
public events such as oral reading or sensing the sounds
produced by a musical instrument. According to Skinner
(1974), "What is felt or introspectively observed is not
some nonphysical world of consciousness, mind, or men-
tal life but the observer's own body" (pp. 18-19).
The acknowledgment of private events is a major
aspect of radical behaviorism. Moore (1980) stated it
concisely:
For radical behaviorism, private events are those events
wherein individuals respond with respect to certain stim-
uli accessible to themselves alone.... The responses
that are made to those stimuli may themselves be public,
i.e., observable by others, or they may be private, i.e.,
accessible only to the individual involved. Nonetheless,
to paraphrase Skinner (1953), it need not be supposed
that events taking place within the skin have any special
properties for that reason alone. ... For radical behav-
iorism, then, one's responses with respect to private
stimuli are equally lawful and alike in kind to one's re-
sponses with respect to public stimuli. (p. 460)
Scientists and practitioners are affected by their own
social context, and institutions and schools are dominated
by mentalism (Heward & Cooper, 1992; Kimball, 2002).
A firm grasp of the philosophy of radical behaviorism, in
addition to knowledge of principles of behavior, can help
the scientist and practitioner resist the mentalistic ap-
proach of dropping the search for controlling variables
in the environment and drifting toward explanatory fic-
tions in the effort to understand behavior. The principles
of behavior and the procedures presented in this text
apply equally to public and private events.
A thorough discussion of radical behaviorism is far
beyond the scope of this text. Still, the serious student of
applied behavior analysis should devote considerable
study to the original works of Skinner and to other authors
who have critiqued, analyzed, and extended the philo-
sophical foundations of the science of behavior." (See
Box 1 for Don Baer's perspectives on the meaning and
importance of radical behaviorism.)
Applied Behavior Analysis
One of the first studies to report the human application of
principles of operant behavior was conducted by Fuller
(1949). The subject was an 18-year-old boy with pro-
found developmental disabilities who was described in
the language of the time as a "vegetative idiot." He lay on
his back, unable to roll over. Fuller filled a syringe with
a warm sugar-milk solution and injected a small amount
of the fluid into the young man's mouth every time he
moved his right arm (that arm was chosen because
he moved it infrequently). Within four sessions the boy
was moving his arm to a vertical position at a rate of three
times per minute.
The attending physicians... thought it was impossible
for him to learn anything-according to them, he had
not learned anything in the 18 years of his life-yet in
four experimental sessions, by using the operant condi-
tioning technique, an addition was made to his behavior
which, at this level, could be termed appreciable. Those
who participated in or observed the experiment are of
the opinion that if time permitted, other responses could
be conditioned and discriminations learned. (Fuller,
1949, p. 590)
During the 1950s and into the early 1960s re-
searchers used the methods of the experimental analysis
of behavior to determine whether the principles of be-
havior demonstrated in the laboratory with nonhuman
subjects could be replicated with humans. Much of the
early research with human subjects was conducted in
clinic or laboratory settings. Although the participants
typically benefited from these studies by learning new
behaviors, the researchers' major purpose was to deter-
mine whether the basic principles of behavior discovered
in the laboratory operated with humans. For example,
Bijou (1955, 1957, 1958) researched several principles
of behavior with typically developing subjects and peo-
ple with mental retardation; Baer (1960, 1961, 1962) ex-
amined the effects of punishment, escape, and avoidance
contingencies on preschool children; Ferster and DeMyer
(1961, 1962; DeMyer & Ferster, 1962) conducted a sys-
tematic study of the principles of behavior using children
with autism as subjects; and Lindsley (1956, 1960) as-
sessed the effects of operant conditioning on the behav-
ior of adults with schizophrenia. These early researchers
clearly established that the principles of behavior are ap-
plicable to human behavior, and they set the stage for the
later development of applied behavior analysis.
The branch of behavior analysis that would later be
called applied behavior analysis (ABA) can be traced to
the 1959 publication of Ayllon and Michael's paper ti-
tled "The Psychiatric Nurse as a Behavioral Engineer."
The authors described how direct care personnel in a state
hospital used a variety of techniques based on the prin-
ciples of behavior to improve the functioning of residents
with psychotic disorders or mental retardation. During
the 1960s many researchers began to apply principles of
behavior in an effort to improve socially important be-
havior, but these early pioneers faced many problems.
Laboratory techniques for measuring behavior and for
controlling and manipulating variables were sometimes
unavailable, or their use was inappropriate in applied set-
tings. As a result, the early practitioners of applied
behavior analysis had to develop new experimental
procedures as they went along. There was little funding
for the new discipline, and researchers had no ready out-
let for publishing their studies, making it difficult to com-
municate among themselves about their findings and
solutions to methodological problems. Most journal ed-
itors were reluctant to publish studies using an experi-
mental method unfamiliar to mainstream social science,
which relied on large numbers of subjects and tests of
statistical inference.
Despite these problems it was an exciting time, and
major new discoveries were being made regularly. For
example, many pioneering applications of behavior prin-
ciples to education occurred during this period (see, e.g.,
O'Leary & O'Leary, 1972; Ulrich, Stachnik, & Mabry
1974), from which were derived teaching procedures such
as contingent teacher praise and attention (Hall, Lund, &
Jackson, 1968), token reinforcement systems (Birnbrauer,
Wolf, Kidder, & Tague, 1965), curriculum design
(Becker, Englemann, & Thomas, 1975), and programmed
instruction (Bijou, Birnbrauer, Kidder, & Tague, 1966;
Markle, 1962). The basic methods for reliably improving
student performance developed by those early applied
behavior analysts provided the foundation for behavioral
approaches to curriculum design, instructional methods,
classroom management, and the generalization and main-
tenance of learning that continue to be used decades later
(cf., Heward et al., 2005).
University programs in applied behavior analysis
were begun in the 1960s and early 1970s at Arizona State

Box 1
What Is Behaviorism?
Don Baer loved the science of behavior. He
loved to write about it, and he loved to talk
about it. Don was famous for his unparalleled
ability to speak extemporaneously about
complex philosophical, experimental, and
professional issues in a way that always made
thorough conceptual, practical, and human
sense. He did so with the vocabulary and
syntax of a great author and the accomplished
delivery of a master storyteller. The only thing
Don knew better than his audience was his
science.
On three occasions, in three different
decades, graduate students and faculty in the
special education program at Ohio State
University were fortunate to have Professor
Baer serve as Distinguished Guest Faculty for
a doctoral seminar, Contemporary Issues in
Special Education and Applied Behavior
Analysis. The questions and responses that
follow were selected from transcripts of two
of Professor Baer's three OSU teleconference
seminars.
If a person on the street approached you and asked,
"What's behaviorism?" how would you reply?
The key point of behaviorism is that what people do can
be understood. Traditionally, both the layperson and the
psychologist have tried to understand behavior by see-
ing it as the outcome of what we think, what we feel,
what we want, what we calculate, and etcetera. But we
don't have to think about behavior that way. We could
look upon it as a process that occurs in its own right and
has its own causes. And those causes are, very often,
found in the external environment.
Behavior analysis is a science of studying how we
can arrange our environments so they make very likely
the behaviors we want to be probable enough, and they
make unlikely the behaviors we want to be improbable.
Behaviorism is understanding how the environment
works so that we can make ourselves smarter, more or-
ganized, more responsible; so we can encounter fewer
punishments and fewer disappointments. A central point
of behaviorism is this: We can remake our environment
to accomplish some of that much more easily than we
can remake our inner selves.
An interviewer once asked Edward Teller, the physi-
cist who helped develop the first atomic bomb, "Can
you explain to a nonscientist what you find so fasci-
nating about science, particularly physics?" Teller
replied, "No." I sense that Teller was suggesting that
a nonscientist would not be able to comprehend, un-
derstand, or appreciate physics and his fascination
with it. If a nonscientist asked you, "What do you
find so fascinating about science, particularly the
science of human behavior?" what would you say?
Ed Morris organized a symposium on just this topic a
couple of years ago at the Association for Behavior
Analysis annual convention, and in that symposium, Jack
Michael commented on the fact that although one of our
discipline's big problems and challenges is communi-
cating with our society about who we are, what we do,
and what we can do, he didn't find it reasonable to try to
summarize what behavior analysis is to an ordinary per-
son in just a few words. He gave us this example: Imag-
ine a quantum physicist is approached at a cocktail party
by someone who asks, "What is quantum physics?" Jack
said that the physicist might very well answer, and prob-
ably should ar or my constell you in a few words. You
I'm very sympathetic with Jack's argument. But I
also know, as someone who's confronted with the poli-
tics of relating our discipline to society, that although it
may be a true answer, it's not a good answer. It's not an
answer that people will hear with any pleasure, or in-
deed, even accept. I think such an answer creates only
resentment. Therefore, I think we have to engage in a bit
of honest show business. So, if I had to somehow state
some connotations of what holds me in the field, I guess
I would say that since I was a child I always found my
biggest reinforcer was something called understanding.
I liked to know how things worked. And of all of the
things in the world there are to understand, it became
clear to me that the most fascinating was what people
do. I started with the usual physical science stuff, and it
was intriguing to me to understand how radios work, and
how electricity works, and how clocks work, etcetera.
But when it became clear to me that we could also learn
how people work—not just biologically, but behav-
iorally—I thought that's the best of all. Surely, everyone
must agree that that's the most fascinating subject mat-
ter. That there could be a science of behavior, of what
we do, of who we are? How could you resist that?
University, Florida State University, the University of Illi-
nois, Indiana University, the University of Kansas, the
University of Oregon, the University of Southern Illinois,
the University of Washington, West Virginia University,
and Western Michigan University, among others. Through
their teaching and research, faculty at each of these pro-
grams made major contributions to the rapid growth of
the field.®
Two significant events in 1968 mark that year as the
formal beginning of contemporary applied behavior
analysis. First, the Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis
(JABA) began publication. JABA was the first journal in
the United States to deal with applied problems that gave
researchers using methodology from the experimental
analysis of behavior an outlet for publishing their find-
ings. JABA was and continues to be the flagship journal
of applied behavior analysis. Many of the early articles in
JABA became model demonstrations of how to conduct
and interpret applied behavior analysis, which in turn led
to improved applications and experimental methodology.
The second major event of 1968 was the publication
of the paper, "Some Current Dimensions of Applied Be-
havior Analysis" by Donald M. Baer, Montrose M. Wolf,
and Todd R. Risley. These authors, the founding fathers
of the new discipline, defined the criteria for judging the
adequacy of research and practice in applied behavior
analysis and outlined the scope of work for those in the
science. Their 1968 paper has been the most widely cited
publication in applied behavior analysis, and it remains
the standard description of the discipline.
Defining Characteristics of
Applied Behavior Analysis
Baer, Wolf, and Risley (1968) recommended that applied
behavior analysis should be applied, behavioral, ana-
lytic, technological, conceptually systematic, effective,
and capable of appropriately generalized outcomes. In
1987 Baer and colleagues reported that the "seven self-
conscious guides to behavior analytic conduct" (p. 319)
they had offered 20 years earlier "remain functional; they
still connote the current dimensions of the work usually
called applied behavior analysis" (p. 314). As we write
this book, nearly 40 years have passed since Baer, Wolf,
and Risley's seminal paper was published, and we find
that the seven dimensions they posed continue to serve as
the primary criteria for defining and judging the value of
applied behavior analysis.
Applied
The applied in applied behavior analysis signals ABA's
commitment to affecting improvements in behaviors that
enhance and improve people's lives. To meet this crite-
rion, the researcher or practitioner must select behaviors
to change that are socially significant for participants:
social, language, academic, daily living, self-care, voca-
tional, and/or recreation and leisure behaviors that im-
prove the day-to-day life experience of the participants
and/or affect their significant others (parents, teachers,
peers, employers) in such a way that they behave more
positively with and toward the participant.
Behavioral
At first it may seem superfluous to include such an ob-
vious criterion—of course applied behavior analysis must
be behavioral. However, Baer and colleagues (1968)
made three important points relative to the behavioral cri-
terion. First, not just any behavior will do; the behavior
chosen for study must be the behavior in need of im-
provement, not a similar behavior that serves as a proxy
for the behavior of interest or the subject's verbal de-
scription of the behavior. Behavior analysts conduct stud-
ies of behavior, not studies about behavior. For example,
in a study evaluating the effects of a program to teach
school children to get along with one another, an applied
behavior analyst would directly observe and measure
clearly defined classes of interactions between and among
the children instead of using indirect measures such as
the children's answers on a sociogram or responses to a
questionnaire about how they believe they get along with
one another.
Second, the behavior must be measurable; the precise
and reliable measurement of behavior is just as critical in
applied research as it is in basic research. Applied re-
searchers must meet the challenge of measuring socially
significant behaviors in their natural settings, and they
must do so without resorting to the measurement of non-
behavioral substitutes.
Third, when changes in behavior are observed dur-
ing an investigation, it is necessary to ask whose behav-
ior has changed. Perhaps only the behavior of the
observers has changed. "Explicit measurement of the re-
liability of human observers thus becomes not merely
good technique, but a prime criterion of whether the study
was appropriately behavioral" (Baer et al., 1968, p. 93).
Or perhaps the experimenter's behavior has changed in an
unplanned way, making it inappropriate to attribute any
observed change in the subject's behavior to the inde-
pendent variables that were manipulated. The applied be-
havior analyst should attempt to monitor the behavior of
all persons involved in a study.
Analytic
A study in applied behavior analysis is analytic when the
experimenter has demonstrated a functional relation be-
tween the manipulated events and a reliable change in
some measurable dimension of the targeted behavior. In
other words, the experimenter must be able to control the
occurrence and nonoccurrence of the behavior. Some-
times, however, society does not allow the repeated
manipulation of important behaviors to satisfy the re-
quirements of experimental method. Therefore, applied
behavior analysts must demonstrate control to the great-
est extent possible, given the restraints of the setting and
behavior; and then they must present the results for judg-
ment by the consumers of the research. The ultimate issue
is believability: Has the researcher achieved experimen-
tal control to demonstrate a reliable functional relation?
The analytic dimension enables ABA to not only
demonstrate effectiveness, but also to provide the "acid
test proof" of functional and replicable relations between
the interventions it recommends and socially significant
outcomes (D. M. Baer, October 21, 1982, personal
communication).
Because we are a data- and design-based discipline, we
are in the remarkable position of being able to prove that
behavior can work in the way that our technology pre-
scribes. We are not theorizing about how behavior can
work; we are describing systematically how it has
worked many times in real-world applications, in de-
signs too competent and with measurement systems too
reliable and valid to doubt. Our ability to prove that be-
havior can work that way does not, of course, establish
that behavior cannot work any other way: we are not
in a discipline that can deny any other approaches,
only in one that can affirm itself as knowing many
of its sufficient conditions at the level of experimental
proof ... our subject matter is behavior change, and
we can specify some actionable sufficient conditions
for it. (D. M. Baer, personal communication, October
21, 1982, emphasis in original).
Technological
A study in applied behavior analysis is technological
when all of its operative procedures are identified and
described with sufficient detail and clarity "such that a
reader has a fair chance of replicating the application with
the same results" (Baer et al., 1987, p. 320).
It is not enough to say what is to be done when the sub-
ject makes response Ry; it is essential also whenever
possible to say what is to be done if the subject makes
the alternative responses, Rz, R3, etc. For example, one
may read that temper tantrums in children are often ex-
tinguished by closing the child in his room for the dura-
tion of the tantrums plus ten minutes. Unless that
procedure description also states what should be done if
the child tries to leave the room early, or kicks out the
window, or smears feces on the walls, or begins to make
strangling sounds, etc., it is not precise technological de-
scription. (Baer et al., 1968, pp. 95-96)
No matter how powerful its effects in any given
study, a behavior change method will be of little value if
practitioners are unable to replicate it. The development
of a replicable technology of behavior change has been
a defining characteristic and continuing goal of ABA
from its inception. Behavioral tactics are replicable and
teachable to others. Interventions that cannot be repli-
cated with sufficient fidelity to achieve comparable out-
comes are not considered part of the technology.
A good check of the technological adequacy of a pro-
cedural description is to have a person trained in applied
behavior analysis carefully read the description and then
act out the procedure in detail. If the person makes any
mistakes, adds any operations, omits any steps, or has to
ask any questions to clarify the written description, then
the description is not sufficiently technological and re-
quires improvement.
Conceptually Systematic
Although Baer and colleagues (1968) did not state so ex-
plicitly, a defining characteristic of applied behavior
analysis concerns the types of interventions used to im-
prove behavior. Although there are an infinite number of
tactics and specific procedures that can be used to alter
behavior, almost all are derivatives and/or combinations
of a relatively few basic principles of behavior. Thus,
Baer and colleagues recommended that research reports
of applied behavior analysis be conceptually systematic,
meaning that the procedures for changing behavior and
any interpretations of how or why those procedures were
effective should be described in terms of the relevant
principle(s) from which they were derived.
Baer and colleagues (1968) provided a strong ra-
tionale for the use of conceptual systems in applied be-
havior analysis. First, relating specific procedures to basic
principles might enable the research consumer to derive
other similar procedures from the same principle(s). Sec-
ond, conceptual systems are needed if a technology is to
become an integrated discipline instead of a "collection
of tricks." Loosely related collections of tricks do not
lend themselves to systematic expansion, and they are
difficult to learn and to teach in great number.
Effective
An effective application of behavioral techniques must
improve the behavior under investigation to a practical
degree. "In application, the theoretical importance of a
variable is usually not at issue. Its practical importance,
specifically its power in altering behavior enough to be
socially important, is the essential criterion" (Baer et al.,
1968, p. 96). Whereas some investigations produce re-
sults of theoretical importance or statistical significance,
to be judged effective an applied behavior analysis study
must produce behavior changes that reach clinical or so-
cial significance.
How much a given behavior of a given subject needs
to change for the improvement to be considered socially
important is a practical question. Baer and colleagues
stated that the answer is most likely to come from the
people who must deal with the behavior; they should be
asked how much the behavior needs to change. The ne-
cessity of producing behavioral changes that are mean-
ingful to the participant and/or those in the participant's
environment has pushed behavior analysts to search for
"robust" variables, interventions that produce large and
consistent effects on behavior (Baer, 1977a).
When they revisited the dimension of effectiveness
20 years later, Baer, Wolf, and Risley (1987) recom-
mended that the effectiveness of ABA also be judged by
a second kind of outcome: the extent to which changes in
the target behaviors result in noticeable changes in the
reasons those behaviors were selected for change origi-
nally. If such changes in the subjects' lives do not occur,
ABA may achieve one level of effectiveness yet fail to
achieve a critical form of social validity (Wolf, 1978).
We may have taught many social skills without examin-
ing whether they actually furthered the subject's social
life; many courtesy skills without examining whether
anyone actually noticed or cared; many safety skills
without examining whether the subject was actually
safer thereafter; many language skills without measuring
whether the subject actually used them to interact differ-
ently than before; many on-task skills without measur-
ing the actual value of those tasks; and, in general, many
survival skills without examining the subject's actual
subsequent survival. (Baer et al., 1987, p. 322)
Generality
A behavior change has generality if it lasts over time, ap-
pears in environments other than the one in which the in-
tervention that initially produced it was implemented,
and/or spreads to other behaviors not directly treated by
the intervention. A behavior change that continues after
the original treatment procedures are withdrawn has gen-
erality. And generality is evident when changes in tar-
geted behavior occur in nontreatment settings or
situations as a function of treatment procedures. Gener-
ality also exists when behaviors change that were not the
focus of the intervention. Although not all instances of
generality are adaptive (e.g., a beginning reader who has
just learned to make the sound for the letter p in words
such as pet and ripe, might make the same sound when
seeing the letter p in the word phone), desirable general-
ized behavior changes are important outcomes of an ap-
plied behavior analysis program because they represent
additional dividends in terms of behavioral improvement.
Some Additional Characteristics
of ABA
Applied behavior analysis offers society an approach to-
ward solving problems that is accountable, public, doable,
empowering, and optimistic (Heward, 2005). Although
not among ABA's defining dimensions, these character-
istics should help increase the extent to which decision
makers and consumers in many areas look to behavior
analysis as a valuable and important source of knowl-
edge for achieving improvements.
Accountable
The commitment of applied behavior analysts to effec-
tiveness, their focus on accessible environmental vari-
ables that reliably influence behavior, and their reliance
on direct and frequent measurement to detect changes in
behavior yield an inescapable and socially valuable form
of accountability. Direct and frequent measurement-the
foundation and most important component of ABA prac-
tices— enables behavior analysts to detect their successes
and, equally important, their failures so they can make
changes in an effort to change failure to success (Bushell
& Bear, 1994; Greenwood & Maheady, 1997).
Failure is always informative in the logic of behavior
analysis, just as it is in engineering. The constant reac-
tion to lack of progress [is] a definitive hallmark of
ABA. (Baer, 2005, p. 8)
Gambrill (2003) described the sense of accountabil-
ity and self-correcting nature of applied behavior analy-
sis very well.
Applied behavior analysis is a scientific approach to un-
derstanding behavior in which we guess and critically
test ideas, rather than guess and guess again. It is a
process for solving problems in which we learn from
our mistakes. Here, false knowledge and inert knowl-
edge are not valued. (p. 67)
Public
"Everything about ABA is visible and public, explicit and
straightforward. ... ABA entails no ephemeral, mysti-
cal, or metaphysical explanations; there are no hidden
treatments; there is no magic" (Heward, 2005, p. 322).
The transparent, public nature of ABA should raise its
value in fields such as education, parenting and child care,
employee productivity, geriatrics, health and safety, and
social work—to name only a few-whose goals, meth-
ods, and outcomes are of vital interest to many con-
stituencies.

Doable
Classroom teachers, parents, coaches, workplace super-
visors, and sometimes the participants themselves im-
plemented the interventions found effective in many ABA
studies. This demonstrates the pragmatic element of
ABA. "Although 'doing ABA' requires far more than
learning to administer a few simple procedures, it is not
prohibitively complicated or arduous. As many teachers
have noted, implementing behavioral strategies in the
classroom . . . might best be described as good old-
fashioned hard work" (Heward, 2005, p. 322).
Empowering
ABA gives practitioners real tools that work. Knowing
how to do something and having the tools to accomplish
it instills confidence in practitioners. Seeing the data
showing behavioral improvements in one's clients, stu-
dents, or teammates, or in oneself, not only feels good,
but also raises one's confidence level in assuming even
more difficult challenges in the future.
Optimistic
Practitioners knowledgeable and skilled in behavior
analysis have genuine cause to be optimistic for four rea-
sons. First, as Strain and Joseph (2004) noted:
The environmental view promoted by behaviorism is es-
sentially optimistic; it suggests that (except for gross ge-
netic factors) all individuals possess roughly equal
potential. Rather than assuming that individuals have
some essential internal characteristic, behaviorists as-
sume that poor outcomes originate in the way the envi-
ronment and experience shaped the individual's current
behavior. Once these environmental and experiential
factors are identified, we can design prevention and in-
tervention programs to improve the outcomes.... Thus,
the emphasis on external control in the behavioral ap-
proach ... offers a conceptual model that celebrates
the possibilities for each individual. (Strain et al.,
1992, p. 58)
Second, direct and continuous measurement enables
practitioners to detect small improvements in perfor-
mance that might otherwise be overlooked. Third, the
more often a practitioner uses behavioral tactics with pos-
itive outcomes (the most common result of behaviorally
based interventions), the more optimistic she becomes
about the prospects for future success.
A sense of optimism, expressed by the question "Why
not?" has been a central part of ABA and has had an
enormous impact on its development from its earliest
days. Why can't we teach a person who does not yet talk
to talk? Why shouldn't we go ahead and try to change
the environments of young children so that they will dis-
play more creativity? Why would we assume that this
person with a developmental disability could not learn to
do the same things that many of us do? Why not try to
do it? (Heward, 2005, p. 323)
Fourth, ABA's peer-reviewed literature provides
many examples of success in teaching students who had
been considered unteachable. ABA's continuous record of
achievements evokes a legitimate feeling of optimism
that future developments will yield solutions to behav-
ioral challenges that are currently beyond the existing
technology. For example, in response to the perspective
that some people have disabilities so severe and profound
that they should be viewed as ineducable, Don Baer of-
fered this perspective:
Some of us have ignored both the thesis that all persons
are educable and the thesis that some persons are inedu-
cable, and instead have experimented with ways to teach
some previously unteachable people. Those experiments
have steadily reduced the size of the apparently inedu-
cable group relative to the obviously educable group.
Clearly, we have not finished that adventure. Why pre-
dict its outcome, when we could simply pursue it, and
just as well without a prediction? Why not pursue it to
see if there comes a day when there is such a small class
of apparently ineducable persons left that it consists of
one elderly person who is put forward as ineducable. If
that day comes, it will be a very nice day. And the next
day will be even better. (D. M. Baer, February 15,
2002, personal communication, as cited in Heward,
2006, p. 473)

Definition of Applied
Behavior Analysis
We began this chapter by stating that applied behavior
analysis is concerned with the improvement and under-
standing of human behavior. We then described some of
the attitudes and methods that are fundamental to scien-
tific inquiry, briefly reviewed the development of the sci-
ence and philosophy of behavior analysis, and examined
the characteristics of ABA. All of that provided neces-
sary context for the following definition of applied be-
havior analysis:
Applied behavior analysis is the science in which
tactics derived from the principles of behavior are
applied systematically to improve socially signifi-
cant behavior and experimentation is used to iden-
tify the variables responsible for behavior change.
This definition includes six key components. First,
the practice of applied behavior analysis is guided by the
attitudes and methods of scientific inquiry. Second, all
behavior change procedures are described and imple-
mented in a systematic, technological manner. Third, not
any means of changing behavior qualifies as applied
behavior analysis: Only those procedures conceptually
derived from the basic principles of behavior are cir-
cumscribed by the field. Fourth, the focus of applied be-
havior analysis is socially significant behavior. The fifth
and sixth parts of the definition specify the twin goals of
applied behavior analysis: improvement and under-
standing. Applied behavior analysis seeks to make mean-
ingful improvement in important behavior and to produce
an analysis of the factors responsible for that improve-
ment.
Four Interrelated Domains of
Behavior Analytic Science and
Professional Practices Guided by
That Science
The science of behavior analysis and its application to
human problems consists of four domains: the three
branches of behavior analysis-behaviorism, EAB, and
ABA— and professional practice in various fields that is
informed and guided by that science. Figure 2 identi-
fies some of the defining features and characteristics of
these four interrelated domains. Although most behavior
analysts work primarily in one or two of the domains
shown in Figure 2, it is common for a behavior analyst
to function in multiple domains at one time or another
(Hawkins & Anderson, 2002; Moore & Cooper, 2003).
A behavior analyst who pursues theoretical and con-
ceptual issues is engaged in behaviorism, the philosoph-
ical domain of behavior analysis. A product of such work
is Delprato's (2002) discussion of the importance of
countercontrol (behavior by people experiencing aver-
sive control by others that helps them escape and avoid
the control while not reinforcing and sometimes punish-
ing the controller's responses) toward an understanding
of effective interventions for interpersonal relations and
cultural design.
The experimental analysis of behavior is the basic
research branch of the science. Basic research consists
of experiments in laboratory settings with both human
and nonhuman subjects with a goal of discovering and
clarifying fundamental principles of behavior. An exam-
ple is Hackenberg and Axtell's (1993) experiments in-
vestigating how choices made by humans are affected by
the dynamic interaction of schedules of reinforcement
that entail short- and long-term consequences.?
Applied behavior analysts conduct experiments
aimed at discovering and clarifying functional relations
between socially significant behavior and its controlling
variables, with which they can contribute to the further
development of a humane and effective technology of
behavior change. An example is research by Tarbox, Wal-
lace, and Williams (2003) on the assessment and treat-
ment of elopement (running or walking away from a
caregiver without permission), a behavior that poses great
danger for young children and people with disabilities.
The delivery of behavior analytic professional ser-
vices occurs in the fourth domain. Behavior analysis prac-
titioners design, implement, and evaluate behavior change
programs that consist of behavior change tactics derived
from fundamental principles of behavior discovered by
basic researchers, and that have been experimentally val-
idated for their effects on socially significant behavior
by applied researchers. An example is when a therapist
providing home-based treatment for a child with autism
embeds frequent opportunities for the child to use his
emerging social and language skills in the context of nat-
uralistic, daily routines and ensures that the child's re-
sponses are followed with reinforcing events. Another
example is a classroom teacher trained in behavior analy-
sis who uses positive reinforcement and stimulus fading
to teach students to identify and classify fish into their
respective species by the shape, size, and location of their
fins.
Although each of the four domains of ABA can be
defined and practiced in its own right, none of the do-
mains are, or should be, completely independent of and
uninformed by developments in the others. Both the sci-
ence and the application of its findings benefit when the
four domains are interrelated and influence one another
(cf., Critchfield & Kollins, 2001; Lattal & Neef; 1996;
Stromer, McComas, & Rehfeldt, 2000). Evidence of the
symbiotic relations between the basic and applied do-
mains is evident in research that "bridges" basic and ap-
plied areas and in applied research that translates the
knowledge derived from basic research "into state-of-
the-art clinical practices for use in the community" (Ler-
man, 2003, p. 415). 1º
Behaviorism Experimental Analysis Applied Behavior Practice Guided
of Behavior (EAB) Analysis (ABA) by Behavior Analysis
— The Science of Behavior Analysis-
.. - The Application of Behavior Analysis — A
Province Theory and Basic research Applied research Helping people behave more
philosophy successfully
Primary activity Conceptual and Design, conduct, Design, conduct, Design, implement, and
philosophical interpret, and report interpret, and report evaluate behavior change
analysis basic experiments applied experiments programs
Primary goal Theoretical Discover and clarify A technology for Improvements in the lives
and product account of all basic principles of improving socially of participants/clients as a
behavior consistent behavior; functional significant behavior; result of changes in their
with existing data relations between functional relations behavior
behavior and controlbetween socially
ling variables significant behavior
and controlling
variables
Secondary goals Identify areas in Identify questions for Identify questions for Increased efficiency in
which empirical EAB and/or ABA to EAB and/or ABA to achieving primary goal; may
data are absent investigate further; investigate further; identify questions for ABA
and/or conflict and raise theoretical raise theoretical and EAB
suggest resolutions issues issues
Agreement with As much as Complete-Although Complete-Although As much as possible, but
existing database possible, but theory differences among differences among practitioners must often deal
must go beyond data sets exist, EAB data sets exist, ABA with situations not covered
database by provides the basic provides the applied by existing data
design research database research database
Testability Partially-All Mostly-Technical Mostly-Same Partially-All behavior and
behavior and limitations preclude limitations as EAB variables of interest are not
variables of interest measurement and plus those posed by accessible (e.g., a student's
are not accessible experimental applied settings (e.g., home life)
(e.g., phylogenic manipulation of some ethical concerns,
contingencies) variables uncontrolled events)
Scope Most « > Least
Wide scope As much scope as As much scope as Narrow scope because
because theory the EAB database the ABA database practitioner's primary focus is
attempts to enables enables helping the specific situation
account for all
behavior
Precision Least « - Most
Minimal precision As much precision as As much precision Maximum precision is sought
is possible because EAB's current techas ABA's current to change behavior most ef-
experimental data nology for experitechnology for fectively in specific instance
do not exist for all mental control and experimental control
behavior encomthe researcher's skills and the researcher's
passed by theory enable skills enable
The Promise and Potential of ABA
In a paper titled, "A Futuristic Perspective for Applied
Behavior Analysis," Jon Bailey (2000) stated that
It seems to me that applied behavior analysis is more
relevant than ever before and that it offers our citizens,
parents, teachers, and corporate and government leaders
advantages that cannot be matched by any other psycho-
logical approach... I know of no other approach in
psychology that can boast state-of-the-art solutions to
the most troubling social ills of the day. (p. 477)
We, too, believe that ABA's pragmatic, natural sci-
ence approach to discovering environmental variables
that reliably influence socially significant behavior and to
developing a technology to take practical advantage of
those discoveries offers humankind its best hope for solv-
ing many of its problems. It is important, however, to rec-
ognize that behavior analysis's knowledge of "how
behavior works," even at the level of fundamental prin-
ciples, is incomplete, as is the technology for changing
socially significant behavior derived from those princi-
ples. There are aspects of about which relatively little is
known, and additional research, both basic and applied,
is needed to clarify, extend, and fine-tune all existing
knowledge (e.g., Critchfield & Kollins, 2001; Friman,
Hayes, & Wilson, 1998; Murphy, McSweeny, Smith, &
McComas, 2003; Stromer, McComas, & Rehfeldt, 2000).
Nevertheless, the still young science of applied be-
havior analysis has contributed to a full range of areas in
which human behavior is important. Even an informal,
cursory survey of the research published in applied be-
havior analysis reveals studies investigating virtually the
full range of socially significant human behavior from A
to Z and almost everywhere in between: AIDS prevention
(e.g., DeVries, Burnette, & Redmona, 1991), conserva-
tion of natural resources (e.g., Brothers, Krantz, & Mc-
Clannahan, 1994), education (e.g., Heward et al., 2005),
gerontology (e.g., Gallagher & Keenan, 2000), health and
exercise (e.g., De Luca & Holborn, 1992), industrial
safety (e.g., Fox, Hopkins, & Anger, 1987), language ac-
quisition (e.g., Drasgow, Halle, & Ostrosky, 1998), lit-
tering (e.g., Powers, Osborne, & Anderson, 1973),
medical procedures (e.g., Hagopian & Thompson, 1999),
parenting (e.g., Kuhn, Lerman, & Vorndran, 2003), seat-
belt use (e.g., Van Houten, Malenfant, Austin, & Lebbon,
2005), sports (e.g., Brobst & Ward, 2002), and zoo man-
agement and care of animals (e.g., Forthman & Ogden,
1992).
Applied behavior analysis provides an empirical
basis for not only understanding human behavior but also
improving it. Equally important, ABA continually tests
and evaluates its methods.
Summary
Some Basic Characteristics and a Definition of Science
1. Different types of scientific investigations yield knowl-
edge that enables the description, prediction, and/or con-
trol of the phenomena studied.
2. Descriptive studies yield a collection of facts about the
observed events that can be quantified, classified, and ex-
amined for possible relations with other known facts.
3. Knowledge gained from a study that finds the systematic
covariation between two events-termed a correlation—
can be used to predict the probability that one event will
occur based on the occurrence of the other event.
4. Results of experiments that show that specific manipula-
tions of one event (the independent variable) produce a re-
liable change in another event (the dependent variable),
and that the change in the dependent variable was unlikely
the result of extraneous factors (confounding variables)—
a finding known as a functional relation— can be used to
control the phenomena under investigation.
5. The behavior of scientists in all fields is characterized by
a common set of assumptions and attitudes:
• Determinism—the assumption that the universe is a law-
ful and orderly place in which phenomena occur as a
result of other events.
• Empiricism-the objective observation of the phenom-
ena of interest.
• Experimentation-the controlled comparison of some
measure of the phenomenon of interest (the dependent
variable) under two or more different conditions in
which only one factor at a time (the independent vari-
able) differs from one condition to another.
• Replication-repeating experiments (and independent
variable conditions within experiments) to determine
the reliability and usefulness of findings
• Parsimony—simple, logical explanations must be ruled
out, experimentally or conceptually, before more com-
plex or abstract explanations are considered.
• Philosophic doubt-continually questioning the truth-
fulness and validity of all scientific theory and
knowledge.
A Brief History of the Development of Behavior Analysis
6. Behavior analysis consists of three major branches: be-
haviorism, the experimental analysis of behavior (EAB),
and applied behavior analysis (ABA).
7. Watson espoused an early form of behaviorism known as
stimulus-response (S-R) psychology, which did not ac-
count for behavior without obvious antecedent causes.
8. Skinner founded the experimental analysis of behavior
(EAB), a natural science approach for discovering orderly
and reliable relations between behavior and various types
of environmental variables of which it is a function.
9. EAB is characterized by these methodological features:
• Rate of response is the most common dependent
variable.
• Repeated or continuous measurement is made of care-
fully defined response classes.
• Within-subject experimental comparisons are used in-
stead of designs comparing the behavior of experimen-
tal and control groups.
• The visual analysis of graphed data is preferred over
statistical inference.
• A description of functional relations is valued over for-
mal theory testing.
10. Through thousands of laboratory experiments, Skinner
and his colleagues and students discovered and verified
the basic principles of operant behavior that provide the
empirical foundation for behavior analysis today.
11. Skinner wrote extensively about a philosophy for a sci-
ence of behavior he called radical behaviorism. Radical
behaviorism attempts to explain all behavior, including
private events such as thinking and feeling.
12. Methodological behaviorism is a philosophical position
that considers behavioral events that cannot be publicly
observed to be outside the realm of the science.
13. Mentalism is an approach to understanding behavior that
assumes that a mental, or "inner," dimension exists that
differs from a behavioral dimension and that phenomena
in this dimension either directly cause or at least mediate
some forms of behavior, it relies on hypothetical constructs
and explanatory fictions.
14. The first published report of the application of operant
conditioning with a human subject was a study by Fuller
(1949), in which an arm-raising response was conditioned
in an adolescent with profound retardation.
15. The formal beginnings of applied behavior analysis can
be traced to 1959 and the publication of Ayllon and
Michael's article, "The Psychiatric Nurse as a Behavioral
Engineer."
16. Contemporary applied behavior analysis (ABA) began in
1968 with the publication of the first issue of the Journal
of Applied Behavior Analysis (JABA).
Defining Characteristics of Applied Behavior Analysis
17. Baer, Wolf, and Risley (1968, 1987) stated that a research
study or behavior change program should meet seven
defining dimensions to be considered applied behavior
analysis:
• Applied-investigates socially significant behaviors
with immediate importance to the subject(s).
• Behavioral— entails precise measurement of the actual
behavior in need of improvement and documents that it
was the subject's behavior that changed.
• Analytic-demonstrates experimental control over the
occurrence and nonoccurrence of the behavior-that is,
if a functional relation is demonstrated.
• Technological-the written description of all procedures
used in the study is sufficiently complete and detailed to
enable others to replicate it.
• Conceptually systematic-behavior change interven-
tions are derived from basic principles of behavior.
• Effective-improves behavior sufficiently to produce
practical results for the participant/client.
• Generality— produces behavior changes that last over
time, appear in other environments, or spread to other
behaviors.
18. ABA offers society an approach toward solving many of
its problems that is accountable, public, doable, empow-
ering, and optimistic.
A Definition of Applied Behavior Analysis
19. Applied behavior analysis is the science in which tactics
derived from the principles of behavior are applied sys-
tematically to improve socially significant behavior and
experimentation is used to identify the variables respon-
sible for behavior change.
20. Behavior analysts work in one or more of four interrelated
domains: behaviorism (theoretical and philosophical is-
sues), the experimental analysis of behavior (basic re-
search), applied behavior analysis (applied research), and
professional practice (providing behavior analytic services
to consumers).
21. ABA's natural science approach to discovering environ-
mental variables that reliably influence socially signifi-
cant behavior and developing a technology to take practical
advantage of those discoveries offers humankind its best
hope for solving many of its problems.

Basic Concepts
Key Terms
antecedent habituation repertoire
automaticity of reinforcement higher order conditioning respondent behavior
aversive stimulus history of reinforcement respondent conditioning
behavior motivating operation respondent extinction
behavior change tactic negative reinforcement response
conditioned punisher neutral stimulus response class
conditioned reflex ontogeny satiation
conditioned reinforcer operant behavior selection by consequences
conditioned stimulus operant conditioning stimulus
consequence phylogeny stimulus class
contingency positive reinforcement stimulus control
contingent principle of behavior stimulus-stimulus pairing
deprivation punisher three-term contingency
discriminated operant punishment unconditioned punisher
discriminative stimulus (S") reflex unconditioned reinforcer
environment reinforcement unconditioned stimulus
extinction reinforcer
Behavior Analyst Certification Board" BBA* & BCABA*
Behavior Analyst Task List, Third Edition
Content Area 3: Principles, Processes, and Concepts
3-1 Define and provide examples of behavior/response/response class.
3-2 Define and provide examples of stimulus and stimulus class.
3-3 Define and provide examples of positive and negative reinforcement.
3-4 Define and provide examples of conditioned and unconditioned reinforcement.
3-5 Define and provide examples of positive and negative punishment.
3-6 Define and provide examples of conditioned and unconditioned punishment.
3-7 Define and provide examples of stimulus control.
3-8 Define and provide examples of establishing operations.
3-9 Define and provide examples of behavioral contingencies.
3-13 Describe and provide examples of the respondent conditioning paradigm.
3-14 Describe and provide examples of the operant conditioning paradigm.
This chapter defines the basic elements involved
in a scientific analysis of behavior and intro-
duces several principles that have been discov-
ered through such an analysis. The first concept we
examine—behavior—is the most fundamental of all. Be-
cause the controlling variables of primary importance in
applied behavior analysis are located in the environment,
the concepts of environment and stimulus are defined
next. We then introduce several essential findings that the
scientific study of behavior-environment relations has
discovered. Two functionally distinct types of behavior—
respondent and operant—are described, and the basic
ways the environment influences each type of behavior—
respondent conditioning and operant conditioning-are
introduced. The three-term contingency—a concept for
expressing and organizing the temporal and functional
relations between operant behavior and environment—
and its importance as a focal point in applied behavior
analysis are then explained.' The chapter's final section
recognizes the incredible complexity of human behav-
ior, reminds us that behavior analysts possess an incom-
plete knowledge, and identifies some of the obstacles and
challenges faced by those who strive to change behavior
in applied settings.
Behavior
What, exactly, is behavior? Behavior is the activity of liv-
ing organisms. Human behavior is everything people do,
including how they move and what they say, think, and
feel. Tearing open a bag of peanuts is behavior, and so is
thinking how good the peanuts will taste once the bag is
open. Reading this sentence is behavior, and if you're
holding the book, so is feeling its weight and shape in
your hands.
Although words such as activity and movement ade-
quately communicate the general notion of behavior, a
more precise definition is needed for scientific purposes.
How a scientific discipline defines its subject matter ex-
erts profound influence on the methods of measurement,
experimentation, and theoretical analysis that are appro-
priate and possible.
Building on Skinner's (1938) definition of behavior
as "the movement of an organism or of its parts in a frame
of reference provided by the organism or by various ex-
ternal objects or fields" (p. 6), Johnston and Pennypacker
(1980, 1993а) articulated the most conceptually sound
and empirically complete definition of behavior to date.
The behavior of an organism is that portion of an organ-
ism's interaction with its environment that is character-
ized by detectable displacement in space through time
of some part of the organism and that results in a mea-
surable change in at least one aspect of the environ-
ment. (p. 23)
Johnston and Pennypacker (1993a) discussed the
major elements of each part of this definition. The phrase
behavior of an organism restricts the subject matter to
the activity of living organisms, leaving notions such as
the "behavior" of the stock market outside the realm of
the scientific use of the term.
The phrase portion of the organism's interaction with
the environment specifies "the necessary and sufficient
conditions for the occurrence of behavior as (a) the exis-
tence of two separate entities, organism and environment,
and (b) the existence of a relation between them" (John-
ston & Pennypacker, 1993a, p. 24). The authors elabo-
rated on this part of the definition as follows:
Behavior is not a property or attribute of the organism. It
happens only when there is an interactive condition be-
tween an organism and its surroundings, which include
its own body. This means that independent states of the
organism, whether real or hypothetical, are not behav-
ioral events, because there is no interactive process.
Being hungry or being anxious are examples of states
that are sometimes confused with the behavior that they
are supposed to explain. Neither phrase specifies an en-
vironmental agent with which the hungry or anxious or-
ganism interacts, so no behavior is implied.
Similarly, independent conditions or changes in the
environment do not define behavioral occurrences be-
cause no interaction is specified. Someone walking in
the rain gets wet, but "getting wet" is not an instance of
behavior. A child may receive tokens for correctly work-
ing math problems, but "receiving a token" is not be-
havior. Receiving a token implies changes in the
environment but does not suggest or require change in
the child's movement. In contrast, both doing math
problems and putting the token in a pocket are behav-
ioral events because the environment both prompts the
child's actions and is then changed by them. (Johnston
& Pennypacker, 1993a, p. 24)
Behavior is movement, regardless of scale; hence the
phrase displacement in space through time. In addition
to excluding static states of the organism, the definition
does not include bodily movements produced by the ac-
tion of independent physical forces as behavioral events.
For example, being blown over by a strong gust of wind
is not behavior; given sufficient wind, nonliving objects
and organisms move similarly. Behavior can be accom-
plished only by living organisms. A useful way to tell
whether movement is behavior is to apply the dead man
test: "If a dead man can do it, it ain't behavior. And if a
dead man can't do, then it is behavior" (Malott & Trojan
Suarez, 2004, p. 9). So, although being knocked down
by strong wind is not behavior (a dead man would also be
blown over), moving arms and hands in front of one's
face, tucking and rolling, and yelling "Whoa!" as one is
being blown over are behaviors.?
The displacement in space through time phrase also
highlights the properties of behavior most amenable to
measurement. Johnston and Pennypacker (1993a) re-
ferred to these fundamental properties by which behav-
ior can be measured as temporal locus (when in time a
specified behavior occurs), temporal extent (the duration
of a given behavioral event), and repeatability (the fre-
quency with which a specified behavior occurs over
time).
Acknowledging that the last phrase of the defini-
tion-that results in a measurable change in at least one
aspect of the environment— is somewhat redundant, John-
ston and Pennypacker (1993a) noted that it emphasizes an
important qualifier for the scientific study of behavior.
Because the organism cannot be separated from an envi-
ronment and because behavior is the relation between
organism and environment, it is impossible for a behav-
ioral event not to influence the environment in some
way. ... This is an important methodological point be-
cause it says that behavior must be detected and mea-
sured in terms of its effects on the environment. (p. 27)
As Skinner (1969) wrote, "To be observed, a re-
sponse must affect the environment—it must have an ef-
fect upon an observer or upon an instrument which in
turn can affect an observer. This is as true of the con-
traction of a small group of muscle fibers as of pressing
a lever or pacing a figure 8" (p. 130).
The word behavior is usually used in reference to a
larger set or class of responses that share certain physi-
cal dimensions (e.g., hand-flapping behavior) or func-
tions (e.g., study behavior).* The term response refers to
a specific instance of behavior. A good technical defini-
tion of response is an "action of an organism's effector:
An effector is an organ at the end of an efferent nerve
fiber that is specialized for altering its environment me-
chanically, chemically, or in terms of other energy
changes" (Michael, 2004, p. 8, italics in original). Human
effectors include the striped muscles (i.e., skeletal mus-
cles such as biceps and quadriceps), smooth muscles
(e.g., stomach and bladder muscles), and glands (e.g.,
adrenal gland).
Like stimulus changes in the environment, behavior
can be described by its form, or physical characteristics.
Response topography refers to the physical shape or form
of behavior. For example, the hand and finger movements
used to open a bag of peanuts can be described by their
topographical elements. However, careful observation
will reveal that the topography differs somewhat each
time a person opens a bag of snacks. The difference may
be significant or slight, but each "bag opening response"
will vary somewhat from all others.
Although it is sometimes useful to describe behavior
by its topography, behavior analysis is characterized by
a functional analysis of the effects of behavior on the en-
vironment. A group of responses with the same function
(that is, each response in the group produces the same
effect on the environment) is called a response class.
Membership in some response classes is open to re-
sponses of widely varying form (e.g., there are many
ways to open a bag of peanuts), whereas the topograph-
ical variation among members of other response classes
is limited (e.g., a person's signature, grip on a golf club).
Another reason underscoring the importance of
a functional analysis of behavior over a structural or
topographical description is that two responses of the
same topography can be vastly different behaviors de-
pending on the controlling variables. For example, say-
ing the word fire while looking the letters, f-i-r-e, is a
vastly different behavior from yelling "Fire!" when
smelling smoke or seeing flames in a crowded theatre.
Behavior analysts use the term repertoire in at least
two ways. Repertoire is sometimes used to refer to all of
the behaviors that a person can do. More often the term
denotes a set or collection of knowledge and skills a per-
son has learned that are relevant to particular settings or
tasks. In the latter sense, each person has acquired or
learned multiple repertoires. For example, each of us has
a repertoire of behaviors appropriate for informal social
situations that differs somewhat (or a lot) from the be-
haviors we use to navigate formal situations. And each
person has repertoires with respect to language skills,
academic tasks, everyday routines, recreation, and so on.
When you complete your study of this text, your reper-
toire of knowledge and skills in applied behavior analy-
sis will be enriched.
Environment
All behavior occurs within an environmental context; be-
havior cannot be emitted in an environmental void or vac-
uum. Johnston and Pennypacker (1993a) offered the
following definition of environment and two critical im-
plications of that definition for a science of behavior:
"Environment" refers to the conglomerate of real circum-
stances in which the organism or referenced part of the
organism exists. A simple way to summarize its coverage
is as "everything except the moving parts of the organism
involved in the behavior." One important implication..
is that only real physical events are included.
Another very important consequence of this con-
ception of the behaviorally relevant environment is
that it can include other aspects of the organism. That
is, the environment for a particular behavior can in-
clude not only the organism's external features but
physical events inside its skin. For instance, scratch-
ing our skin is presumably under control of the exter-
nal visual stimulus provided by your body, particularly
that part being scratched, as well as the stimulation
that we call itching, which lies inside the skin. In fact,
both types of stimulation very often contribute to be-
havioral control. This means that the skin is not an
especially important boundary in the understanding
of behavioral laws, although it can certainly provide
observational challenges to discovering those laws.
(p. 28)
The environment is a complex, dynamic universe of
events that differs from instance to instance. When be-
havior analysts describe particular aspects of the envi-
ronment, they talk in terms of stimulus conditions or
events.* A good definition of stimulus is "an energy
change that affects an organism through its receptor
cells" (Michael, 2004, p. 7). Humans have receptor sys-
tems that detect stimulus changes occurring outside and
inside the body. Exteroceptors are sense organs that de-
tect external stimuli and enable vision, hearing, olfac-
tion, taste, and cutaneous touch. Two types of sense
organs sensitive to stimulus changes within the body are
interceptors, which are sensitive to stimuli originating
in the viscera (e.g., feeling a stomach ache), and pro-
prioceptors, which enable the kinesthetic and vestibu-
lar senses of movement and balance. Applied behavior
analysts most often study the effects of stimulus changes
that occur outside the body. External stimulus conditions
and events are not only more accessible to observation
and manipulation than are internal conditions, but also
they are key features of the physical and social world in
which people live.
The environment influences behavior primarily by
stimulus change and not static stimulus conditions. As
Michael (2004) noted, when behavior analysts speak of
the presentation or occurrence of a stimulus, they usu-
ally mean stimulus change.
For example, in respondent conditioning the conditioned
stimulus may be referred to as a tone. However, the rele-
vant event is actually a change from the absence of tone
to the tone sounding..., and although this is usually
understood without having to be mentioned, it can be
overlooked in the analysis of more complex phenomena.
Operant discriminative stimuli, conditioned reinforcers,
conditioned punishers, and conditioned motivative vari-
ables are also usually important as stimulus changes, not
static conditions (Michael, 2004, pp. 7-8).5
Stimulus events can be described formally (by their
physical features), temporally (by when they occur with
respect to a behavior of interest), and functionally (by
their effects on behavior). Behavior analysts used the term
stimulus class to refer to any group of stimuli sharing a
predetermined set of common elements in one or more of
these dimensions.
Formal Dimensions of Stimuli
Behavior analysts often describe, measure, and manipu-
late stimuli according to their formal dimensions, such
as size, color, intensity, weight, and spatial position rel-
ative to other objects. Stimuli can be nonsocial (e.g., a
red light, a high-pitched sound) or social (e.g., a friend
asking, "Want some more peanuts?").
Temporal Loci of Stimuli
Because behavior and the environmental conditions that
influence it occur within and across time, the temporal lo-
cation of stimulus changes is important. In particular, be-
havior is affected by stimulus changes that occur prior to
and immediately after the behavior. The term antecedent
refers to environmental conditions or stimulus changes
that exist or occur prior to the behavior of interest.
Because behavior cannot occur in an environmental
void or vacuum, every response takes place in the context
of a particular situation or set of antecedent conditions.
These antecedent events play a critical part in learning
and motivation, and they do so irrespective of whether
the learner or someone in the role of behavior analyst or
teacher has planned or is even aware of them.
For example, just some of the functionally relevant an-
tecedents for a student's performance on a timed math
test might include the following: the amount of sleep the
student had the night before; the temperature, lighting,
and seating arrangements in the classroom; the teacher
reminding the class that students who beat their personal
best scores on the test will get a free homework pass;
and the specific type, format, and sequence of math
problems on the test. Each of those antecedent variables
(and others) has the potential to exert a great deal, a lit-
tle, or no noticeable effect on performance as a function
of the student's experiences with respect to a particular
antecedent. (Heward & Silvestri, 2005, p. 1135)
A consequence is a stimulus change that follows a
behavior of interest. Some consequences, especially those
that are immediate and relevant to current motivational
states, have significant influence on future behavior; other
consequences have little effect. Consequences combine
with antecedent conditions to determine what is learned.
Again, this is true whether the individual or someone try-
ing to change his behavior is aware of or systematically
plans the consequences.
Like antecedent stimulus events, consequences may
also be social or nonsocial events. Table 1 shows ex-
amples of various combinations of social and nonsocial
antecedent and consequent events for four behaviors.

Behavioral Functions
of Stimulus Changes
Some stimulus changes exert immediate and powerful
control over behavior, whereas others have delayed ef-
fects, or no apparent effect. Even though we can and often
do describe stimuli by their physical characteristics (e.g.,
the pitch and decibel level of a tone, the topography of a
person's hand and arm movements), stimulus changes
are understood best through a functional analysis of their
effects on behavior. For example, the same decibel tone
that functions in one environment and set of conditions
as a prompt for checking the clothes in the dryer may
function as a warning signal to fasten a seat belt in an-
other setting or situation; the same hand and arm motion
that produces a smile and a "Hi" from another person in
one set of conditions receives a scowl and obscene ges-
ture in another.
Stimulus changes can have one or both of two basic
kinds of functions or effects on behavior: (a) an imme-
diate but temporary effect of increasing or decreasing the
current frequency of the behavior, and/or (b) a delayed but
relatively permanent effect in terms of the frequency of
that type of behavior in the future (Michael, 1995). For
example, a sudden downpour on a cloudy day is likely
to increase immediately the frequency of all behavior that
has resulted in the person successfully escaping rain in the
past, such as running for cover under an awning or pulling
her jacket over her head. If the person had decided not to
carry her umbrella just before leaving the house, the
downpour may decrease the frequency of that behavior on
cloudy days in the future.
Table 1 Antecedent (Situation) and Consequent Events Can Be Nonsocial (Italicized), Social (Boldface), or
a Combination of Social and Nonsocial
Situation Response Consequence
Drink machine Deposit coins Cold drink
Five cups on table "One-two-three-four-five cups" Teacher nods and smiles
Friend says "turn left" Turn left Arrive at destination
Friend asks "What time is it?" "Six-fifteen" Friend says "Thanks"
Respondent Behavior
All intact organisms enter the world able to respond in
predictable ways to certain stimuli; no learning is re-
quired. These ready-made behaviors protect against
harmful stimuli (e.g., eyes watering and blinking to re-
move particles on the cornea), help regulate the internal
balance and economy of the organism (e.g., changes in
heart rate and respiration in response to changes in tem-
perature and activity levels), and promote reproduction
(e.g., sexual arousal). Each of these stimulus-response
relations, called a reflex, is part of the organism's genetic
endowment, a product of natural evolution because of its
survival value to the species. Each member of a given
species comes equipped with the same repertoire of un-
conditioned (or unlearned) reflexes. Reflexes provide the
organism with a set of built-in responses to specific stim-
uli; these are behaviors the individual organism would
not have time to learn. Table 2 shows examples of re-
flexes common to humans.
The response component of the stimulus-response
reflex is called respondent behavior. Respondent be-
havior is defined as behavior that is elicited by antecedent
stimuli. Respondent behavior is induced, or brought out,
by a stimulus that precedes the behavior; nothing else is
required for the response to occur. For example, bright
light in the eyes (antecedent stimulus) will elicit pupil
contraction (respondent). If the relevant body parts (i.e.,
receptors and effectors) are intact, pupil contraction will
occur every time. However, if the eliciting stimulus is
presented repeatedly over a short span of time, the
strength or magnitude of the response will diminish, and
in some cases the response may not occur at all. This
process of gradually diminishing response strength is
known as habituation.
Table 2 Examples of Unconditioned Human Reflexes Susceptible to Respondent Conditioning
Unconditioned stimulus Unconditioned response Type of effector
Loud sound or touch to cornea Eye blink (lid closes) Striped muscle
Tactile stimulus under lid or chemical Lachrimal gland secretion Gland (duct)
irritant (smoke) (eyes watering)
Irritation to nasal mucosa Sneezing Striped and smooth muscle
Irritation to throat Coughing Striped and smooth muscle
Low temperature Shivering, surface vasoconstriction Striped and smooth muscle
High temperature Sweating, surface vasodilation Gland, smooth muscle
Loud sound Contraction of tensor tympani and Striped muscles
stapedius muscles (reduces amplitude
of ear drum vibrations)
Food in mouth Salivation Gland
Undigestible food in stomach Vomiting Striped and smooth muscle
Pain stimulus to hand or foot Hand or foot withdrawal Striped muscle
A single stimulus that is painful or very Activation syndrome-all of the following:
intense or very unusual Heart rate increase Cardiac muscle
Adrenaline secretion Gland (ductless)
Liver release of sugar into bloodstream Gland (duct)
Constriction of visceral blood vessels Smooth muscle
Dilation of blood vessels in skeletal Smooth muscle
muscles
Galvanic skin response (GSR) Gland (duct)
Pupillary dilation (and many more) Smooth muscle
Respondent Conditioning
New stimuli can acquire the ability to elicit respondents.
Called respondent conditioning, this type of learning
is associated most with the Russian physiologist Ivan
Petrovich Pavlov (1849-1936).® While studying the di-
gestive system of dogs, Pavlov noticed that the animals
salivated every time his laboratory assistant opened the
cage door to feed them. Dogs do not naturally salivate at
the sight of someone in a lab coat, but in Pavlov's labo-
ratory they consistently salivated when the door was
opened. His curiosity aroused, Pavlov (1927) designed
and conducted an historic series of experiments. The re-
sult of this work was the experimental demonstration of
respondent conditioning.
Pavlov started a metronome just an instant be-
fore feeding the dogs. Prior to being exposed to this
stimulus-stimulus pairing procedure, food in the mouth,
an unconditioned stimulus (US), elicited salivation, but
the sound of the metronome, a neutral stimulus (NS),
did not. After experiencing several trials consisting of the
sound of the metronome followed by the presentation of
food, the dogs began salivating in response to the sound
of the metronome. The metronome had thus become a
conditioned stimulus (CS), and a conditioned reflex
was established.? Respondent conditioning is most ef-
fective when the NS is presented immediately before or
simultaneous with the US. However, some conditioning
effects can sometimes be achieved with considerable
delay between the onset of the NS and the onset of the
US, and even with backward conditioning in which the
US precedes the NS.
Respondent Extinction
Pavlov also discovered that once a conditioned reflex
was established, it would weaken and eventually cease
altogether if the conditioned stimulus was presented
repeatedly in the absence of the unconditioned stimu-
lus. For example, if the sound of the metronome was
presented repeatedly without being accompanied or fol-
lowed by food, it would gradually lose its ability to
elicit salivation. The procedure of repeatedly present-
ing a conditioned stimulus without the unconditioned
stimulus until the conditioned stimulus no longer elic-
its the conditioned response is called respondent
extinction.
Figure 1 shows schematic representations of re-
spondent conditioning and respondent extinction. In this
example, a puff of air produced by a glaucoma-testing
machine is the US for the eye blink reflex. The opthal-
mologist's finger pressing the button of the machine
makes a faint clicking sound. But prior to conditioning,
the clicking sound is an NS: It has no effect on eye blink-
ing. After being paired with the air puff just a few times,
the finger-on-the-button sound becomes a CS: It elicits
eye blinking as a conditioned reflex.
Conditioned reflexes can also be established by stim-
ulus-stimulus pairing of an NS with a CS. This form of
respondent conditioning is called higher order (or sec-
ondary) conditioning. For example, secondary respon-
dent conditioning could occur in a patient who has
learned to blink at the clicking sound of the button dur-
ing the glaucoma-testing situation as follows. The patient
detects a slight movement of the ophthalmologist's fin-
ger (NS) just before it contacts the button that makes the
clicking sound (CS). After several NS-CS pairings,
movement of the ophthalmologist's finger may become
a CS capable of eliciting blinking.
The form, or topography, of respondent behaviors
changes little, if at all, during a person's lifetime. There
are two exceptions: (a) Certain reflexes disappear with
maturity, such as that of grasping an object placed in
the palm of the hand, a reflex usually not seen after
the age of 3 months (Bijou & Baer, 1965); and (b) sev-
eral unconditioned reflexes first appear later in life,
such as those related to sexual arousal and reproduc-
tion. However, during a person's lifetime an infinite
range of stimuli that were previously neutral (e.g., the
high-pitched whine of the dentist's drill) can come
to elicit respondents (i.e., increased heartbeat and
perspiration).
Respondents make up a small percentage of the
behaviors typically of interest to the applied behavior
analyst. As Skinner (1953) pointed out, "Reflexes, con-
ditioned or otherwise, are mainly concerned with the in-
ternal physiology of the organism. We are most often
interested, however, in behavior which has some effect
upon the surrounding world" (p. 59). It is this latter type
of behavior, and the process by which it is learned, that
we will now examine.
Before Conditioning Us UR (eye blink)
(air puff)
NS ---------no cye blink
(clicking sound)
Respondent Conditioning NS + US UR (eye blink)
(click & air puff)
NS + US UR (eye blink)
(click & air pufi)
(more trials)
Product of Us
Respondent Conditioning (air puff) UR (eye blink)
Cs CR (eye blink)
(clicking sound)
Respondent Extinction Cs CR (eye blink)
(clicking sound)
CS
(clicking sound)CR (cyc blink)
(clicking sound) — CR (eye blink)
(more trials)
Results of US UR (eye blink)
Respondent Extinction (air puff)
NS no cye blink
(clicking sound)
Figure 1 Schematic representation of
respondent conditioning and respondent
extinction. The top panel shows an uncondi-
tioned reflex: a puff of air (unconditioned
stimulus, or US) elicits an eye blink (an
unconditioned response, or UR). Before
conditioning, a clicking sound (a neutral
stimulus, or NS) has no effect on eye
blinking. Respondent conditioning consists
of a stimulus-stimulus pairing procedure
in which the clicking sound is presented
repeatedly just prior to, or simultaneously
with, the air puff. The product of respondent
conditioning is a conditioned reflex (CR): In
this case the clicking sound has become a
conditioned stimulus (CS) that elicits an eye
blink when presented alone. The bottom two
panels illustrate the procedure and outcome
of respondent extinction: Repeated presen-
tations of the CS alone gradually weaken its
ability to elicit eye blinking to the point
where the CS eventually becomes an NS
again. The unconditioned reflex remains
unchanged before, during, and after respon-
dent conditioning.
Figure 1 Schematic representation of
respondent conditioning and respondent
extinction. The top panel shows an uncondi-
tioned reflex: a puff of air (unconditioned
stimulus, or US) elicits an eye blink (an
unconditioned response, or UR). Before
conditioning, a clicking sound (a neutral
stimulus, or NS) has no effect on eye
blinking. Respondent conditioning consists
of a stimulus-stimulus pairing procedure
in which the clicking sound is presented
repeatedly just prior to, or simultaneously
with, the air puff. The product of respondent
conditioning is a conditioned reflex (CR): In
this case the clicking sound has become a
conditioned stimulus (CS) that elicits an eye
blink when presented alone. The bottom two
panels illustrate the procedure and outcome
of respondent extinction: Repeated presen-
tations of the CS alone gradually weaken its
ability to elicit eye blinking to the point
where the CS eventually becomes an NS
again. The unconditioned reflex remains
unchanged before, during, and after respon-
dent conditioning.
Fortunately, in addition to her repertoire of geneti-
cally inherited respondent behaviors, our baby entered her
world with some uncommitted behavior that is highly mal-
leable and susceptible to change through its consequences.
This type of behavior, called operant behavior, enables
the baby over the course of her life to learn novel, in-
creasingly complex responses to an ever-changing world.®
Operant behavior is any behavior whose future fre-
quency is determined primarily by its history of conse-
quences. Unlike respondent behavior, which is elicited
by antecedent events, operant behavior is selected,
shaped, and maintained by the consequences that have
followed it in the past.
Unlike respondent behaviors, whose topography and
basic functions are predetermined, operant behaviors can
take a virtually unlimited range of forms. The form and
function of respondent behaviors are constant and can be
identified by their topography (e.g., the basic form and
function of salivation is always the same). By compari-
son, however, the "meaning" of operant behavior cannot
be determined by its topography. Operants are defined
functionally, by their effects. Not only does the same op-
erant often include responses of widely different topogra-
phies (e.g., a diner may obtain a glass of water by nodding
his head, pointing to a glass of water, or saying yes to a
waiter), but also, as Skinner (1969) explained, the same
movements comprise different operants under different
conditions.
Allowing water to pass over one's hands can perhaps be
adequately described as topography, but "washing one's
hands" is an "operant" defined by the fact that, when
one has behaved this way in the past, one's hands have
become clean—a condition which has become reinforc-
ing because, say, it has minimized a threat of criticism
or contagion. Behavior of precisely the same topography
would be part of another operant if the reinforcement
had consisted of simple stimulation (e.g., "tickling") of
the hands or the evocation of imitative behavior in a
child whom one is teaching to wash his hands. (p. 127)
Table 3 compares and contrasts defining features
and key characteristics of respondent behavior and oper-
ant behavior.
Selection by Consequences
Human behavior is the joint product of (i) the contingen-
cies of survival responsible for the natural selection of
the species and (il) the contingencies of reinforcement
responsible for the repertoires acquired by its members,
including (ili) the special contingencies maintained by
the social environment. [Ultimately, of course, it is all a
matter of natural selection, since operant conditioning is
an evolved process, of which cultural practices are spe-
cial applications.]
-B. F. Skinner (1981, p. 502)
Skinner's discovery and subsequent elucidation of oper-
ant selection by consequences have rightly been called
"revolutionary" and "the bedrock on which other behav-
ioral principles rest" (Glenn, 2004, p. 134). Selection by
consequences "anchors a new paradigm in the life sci-
ences known as selectionism. A basic tenet of this posi-
tion is that all forms of life, from single cells to complex
cultures, evolve as a result of selection with respect to
function" (Pennypacker, 1994, pp. 12-13).
Selection by consequences operates during the life-
time of the individual organism (ontogeny) and is a con-
ceptual parallel to Darwin's (1872/1958) natural selec-
tion in the evolutionary history of a species (phylogeny).
In response to the question, "Why do giraffes have long
necks?" Baum (1994) gave this excellent description of
natural selection:
Darwin's great contribution was to see that a relatively
simple mechanism could help explain why phylogeny
followed the particular course it did. The explanation
about giraffes' necks requires reference to the births,
lives, and deaths of countless giraffes and giraffe an-
cestors over many millions of years.... Within any
population of organisms, individuals vary. They vary
partly because of environmental factors (e.g., nutri-
tion), and also because of genetic inheritance. Among
the giraffe ancestors that lived in what is now the
Serengeti Plain, for instance, variation in genes meant
that some had shorter necks and some had longer
necks. As the climate gradually changed however, new,
taller types of vegetation became more frequent. The
giraffe ancestors that had longer necks, being able to
reach higher, got a little more to eat, on the average. As
a result, they were a little healthier, resisted disease a
little better, evaded predators a little better—on the av-
erage. Any one individual with a longer neck may have
died without offspring, but on the average longer-
necked individuals had more offspring, which tended
on the average to survive a little better and produce
more offspring. As longer necks became more fre-
quent, new genetic combinations occurred, with the re-
sult that some offspring had still longer necks than
those before, and they did still better. As the longer-
necked giraffes continued to out-reproduce the shorter-
necked ones, the average neck length of the whole
population grew. (p. 52)
Just as natural selection requires a population of
individual organisms with varied physical features (e.g.,
giraffes with necks of different lengths), operant se-
lection by consequences requires variation in behav-
ior. Those behaviors that produce the most favorable
outcomes are selected and "survive," which leads to a
more adaptive repertoire. Natural selection has en-
dowed humans with an initial population of uncom-
mitted behavior (e.g., babies babbling and moving their
limbs about) that is highly malleable and susceptible
to the influence of the consequences that follow it. As
Glenn (2004) noted,
By outfitting humans with a largely uncommitted behav-
ioral repertoire, natural selection gave our species a long
leash for local behavioral adaptations. But the uncom-
mitted repertoire of humans would be lethal without
the ... susceptibility of human behavior to operant se-
lection. Although this behavioral characteristic is shared
by many species, humans appear to be most exquisitely
sensitive to behavioral contingencies of selection.
(Schwartz, 1974, p. 139)
Table 3 Comparing and Contrasting Defining Features and Key Characteristics of Respondent
and Operant Behavior
Characteristics or features Respondent behavior Operant behavior
Definition Behavior elicited by antecedent stimuli. Behavior selected by its consequences.
Basic unit Reflex: an antecedent stimulus elicits a parOperant response class: A group of responses
ticular response (S-R). all of which produce the same effect on the
environment; described by three-term contin-
gency relation of antecedent stimulus condi-
tions, behavior, and consequence (A-B-C).
Examples Newborn's grasping and suckling to touch; pupil Talking, walking, playing the piano, riding a
constriction to bright light; cough/gag to irritation bike, counting change, baking a pie, hitting a
in throat: salivation at smell of food; withdrawing curveball, laughing at a joke, thinking about a
hand from painful stimulus; sexual arousal to grandparent, reading this book.
stimulation.
Body parts (effectors) that Primarily smooth muscles and glands (adrenaPrimarily striated (skeletal) muscles; sometimes
most often produce the line squirt); sometimes striated (skeletal) mussmooth muscles and glands.
response (not a defining cles (e.g., knee-jerk to tap just below patella).
feature)
Function or usefulness for Maintains internal economy of the organism; Enables effective interaction and adaptation in
individual organism provides a set of "ready-made" survival rean ever-changing environment that could not be
sponses the organism would not have time anticipated by evolution.
to learn.
Function or usefulness Promotes continuation of species indirectly Individuals whose behavior is most sensitive to
for species (protective reflexes help individuals survive to consequences are more likely to survive and
reproductive age) and directly (reflexes related reproduce.
to reproduction).
Conditioning process Respondent (also called, classical or Pavlovian) Operant conditioning: Some stimulus changes
conditioning: Through a stimulus-stimulus pairimmediately following a response increase (re-
ing procedure in which a neutral stimulus (NS) inforcement) or decrease (punishment) the
presented just prior to or simultaneous with an future frequency of similar responses under
unconditioned (US) or conditioned (CS) eliciting similar conditions. Previously neutral stim-
stimulus, the NS becomes a CS that elicits the ulus changes become conditioned reinforcers
response and a conditioned reflex is created. or punishers as result of stimulus-stimulus
(See Figure 1) pairing with other reinforcers or punishers.
Repertoire limits Topography and function of respondents deterTopography and function of each person's
mined by natural evolution of species (phylogeny). repertoire of operant behaviors are selected by
All biologically intact members of a species consequences during the individual's lifetime
possess the same set of unconditioned reflexes. (ontogeny). New and more complex operant re-
Although new forms of respondent behavior are sponse classes can emerge. Response prod-
not learned, an infinite number of conditioned ucts of some human operants (e.g., airplanes)
reflexes may emerge in an individual's repertoire enable some behaviors not possible by anatom-
depending on the stimulus-stimulus pairing he ical structure alone (e.g., flying).
has experienced (ontogeny).
Operant Conditioning
Operant conditioning may be seen everywhere in the
multifarious activities of human beings from birth until
death. ... It is present in our most delicate discrimina-
tions and our subtlest skills; in our earliest crude habits
and the highest refinements of creative thought.
—Keller and Schoenfeld (1950, p. 64)
Operant conditioning refers to the process and se-
lective effects of consequences on behavior.' From an
operant conditioning perspective a functional conse-
quence is a stimulus change that follows a given behavior
in a relatively immediate temporal sequence and alters
the frequency of that type of behavior in the future. "In
operant conditioning we 'strengthen' an operant in the
sense of making a response more probable or, in actual
fact, more frequent" (Skinner, 1953, p. 65). If the move-
ment and sounds produced by the baby's batting at the
mobile with her hands increase the frequency of hand
movements in the direction of the toy, operant condi-
tioning has occurred.
When operant conditioning consists of an increase
in response frequency, reinforcement has taken place, and
the consequence responsible, in this case the movement
and sound of the mobile, would be called a reinforcer.!°
Although operant conditioning is used most often to refer
to the "strengthening" effects of reinforcement, as Skin-
ner described earlier, it also encompasses the principle
of punishment. If the mobile's movement and musical
sounds resulted in a decrease in the baby's frequency of
moving it with her hands, punishment has occurred, and
the mobile's movement and sound would be called puni-
shers. Before we examine the principles of reinforce-
ment and punishment further, it is important to identify
several important qualifications concerning how conse-
quences affect behavior.
Consequences Can Affect Only Future Behavior
Consequences affect only future behavior. Specifically, a
behavioral consequence affects the relative frequency
with which similar responses will be emitted in the future
under similar stimulus conditions. This point may seem
too obvious to merit mention because it is both logically
and physically impossible for a consequent event to af-
fect a behavior that preceded it, when that behavior is
over before the consequent event occurs. Nevertheless,
the statement "behavior is controlled by its conse-
quences" raises the question. (See Box 1 for further
discussion of this apparent logical fallacy.)
Consequences Select Response Classes,
Not Individual Responses
Responses emitted because of the effects of reinforce-
ment of previous responses will differ slightly from the
previous responses but will share enough common ele-
ments with the former responses to produce the same
consequence.
Reinforcement strengthens responses which differ in
topography from the response reinforced. When we rein-
force pressing a lever, for example, or saying Hello, re-
sponses differing quite widely in topography grow more
probable. This is a characteristic of behavior which has
strong survival value . .., since it would be very hard
for an organism to acquire an effective repertoire if rein-
forcement strengthened only identical responses. (Skin-
ner, 1969, p. 131)
These topographically different, but functionally
similar, responses comprise an operant response class.
Indeed, "an operant is a class of acts all of which have the
same environmental effect" (Baum, 1994, p. 75). It is the
response class that is strengthened or weakened by op-
erant conditioning. The concept of response class is "im-
plied when it is said that reinforcement increases the
future frequency of the type of behavior that immedi-
ately preceded the reinforcement" (Michael, 2004, p. 9).
And the concept of response class is a key to the devel-
opment and elaboration of new behavior.
If consequences (or natural evolution) selected only
a very narrow range of responses (or genotypes), the ef-
fect would "tend toward uniformity and a perfection of
sorts" (Moxley, 2004, p. 110) that would place the be-
havior (or species) at risk of extinction should the envi-
ronment change. For example, if the mobile's movement
and sound reinforced only arm and hand movements that
fell within an exact and narrow range of motion and no
similar movements survived, the baby would be unable
to contact that reinforcement if one day her mother
mounted the mobile in a different location above the crib.

Immediate Consequences
Have the Greatest Effect
Behavior is most sensitive to stimulus changes that occur
immediately after, or within a few seconds of, the responses.
It is essential to emphasize the importance of the imme-
diacy of reinforcement. Events that are delayed more
than a few seconds after the response do not directly in-
crease its future frequency. When human behavior is ap-
parently affected by long-delayed consequences, the
change is accomplished by virtue of the human's com-
plex social and verbal history, and should not be thought
of as an instance of the simple strengthening of behavior
by reinforcement... [As with reinforcement,] the
longer the time delay between the occurrence of the re-
sponse and the occurrence of the stimulus change (be-
tween R and S*), the less effective the punishment will
be in changing the relevant response frequency, but not
Box 1
When the Phone Rings:
A Dialogue about Stimulus Control
The professor was ready to move on to his next point,
but a raised hand in the front row caught his attention.
Professor: Yes?
Student: You say that operant behavior, like talking,
writing, running, reading, driving a car, most every-
thing we do— you say all of those behaviors are con-
trolled by their consequences, by things that happen
after the response was emitted?
Professor: Yes, I said that. Yes.
Student: Well, I have a hard time with that. When my
telephone rings and I pick up the receiver, that's an
operant response, right? I mean, answering the
phone when it rings certainly didn't evolve geneti-
cally as a reflex to help our species survive. So, we
are talking about operant behavior, correct?
Professor: Correct.
Student: All right then. How can we say that my pick-
ing up my telephone is controlled by its conse-
quence? I pick up the phone because it is ringing.
So does everybody else. Ringing controls the re-
sponse. And ringing can't be a consequence because
it comes before the response.
The professor hesitated with his reply just long enough
for the student to believe himself the hero, nailing a
professor for pontificating about some theoretical
concept with little or no relevance to the everyday
real world. Simultaneously sensing victory, other
students began to pile on with their comments.
Another Student: How about stepping on the brake
when you see a stop sign? The sign controls the
braking response, and that's not a consequence
either.
A Student from the Back of the Room: And take a com-
mon classroom example. When a kid sees the prob-
lem 2 + 2 on his worksheet and he writes 4, the
response of writing 4 has to be controlled by the writ-
ten problem itself. Otherwise, how could anyone learn
the correct answers to any question or problem?
Most of the Class: Yah, that's right!
Professor: (with a wry smile) All of you are cor-
rect. ... So too am I.
Someone Else in the Class: What do you mean?
Professor: That was exactly my next point, and I was
hoping you would pick up on it. (The professor
smiled a thank you at the student who had started
the discussion and went on.) All around us, every
day, we are exposed to thousands of changing stim-
ulus conditions. All of the situations you've de-
scribed are excellent examples of what behavior
analysts call stimulus control. When the frequency
of a given behavior is higher in the presence of a
given stimulus than when that stimulus is absent, we
say that stimulus control is at work. Stimulus control
is a very important and useful principle in behavior
analysis, and it will be the subject of much discus-
sion this semester.
But, and here's the important point: A dis-
criminative stimulus, the antecedent event that
comes before the response of interest, acquires its
ability to control a particular response class because
it has been associated with certain consequences in
the past. So it is not just the sound of the phone's
ring that causes you to pick up the receiver. It is the
fact that in the past answering the phone when it
was ringing was followed by a person's voice. It's
that person talking to you, the consequence of pick-
ing up the receiver, that really controlled the be-
havior in the first place, but you pick up the phone
only when you hear it ringing. Why? Because you
have learned that there's someone on the other end
only when the phone's ringing. So we can still speak
of consequences as having the ultimate control in
terms of controlling operant behavior, but by being
paired with differential consequences, antecedent
stimuli can indicate what kind of consequence is
likely. This concept is called the three-term contin-
gency, and its understanding, analysis, and manip-
ulation is central to applied behavior analysis.
much is known about upper limits. (Michael, 2004, p.
110, 36 emphasis in original, words in brackets added)
Consequences Select Any Behavior
Reinforcement and punishment are "equal opportunity"
selectors. No logical or healthy or (in the long run) adap-
tive connection between a behavior and the consequence
that functions to strengthen or weaken it is necessary.
Any behavior that immediately precedes reinforcement
(or punishment) will be increased (or decreased).
It is the temporal relation between behavior and con-
sequence that is functional, not the topographical or log-
ical ones. "So far as the organism is concerned, the only
important property of the contingency is temporal. The
reinforcer simply follows the response. How this is
brought about does not matter" (Skinner, 1953, p. 85,
emphasis in original). The arbitrary nature of which be-
haviors are reinforced (or punished) in operant condi-
tioning is exemplified by the appearance of idiosyncratic
behaviors that have no apparent purpose or function. An
example is the superstitious routine of a poker player
who taps and arranges his cards in a peculiar fashion be-
cause similar movements in the past were followed by
winning hands.
Operant Conditioning Occurs Automatically
Operant conditioning does not require a person's aware-
ness. "A reinforcing connection need not be obvious to
the individual [whose behavior is] reinforced" (Skinner,
1953, p. 75, words in brackets added). This statement
refers to the automaticity of reinforcement; that is, be-
havior is modified by its consequences regardless of
whether the individual is aware that she is being re-
inforced." A person does not have to understand or
verbalize the relation between her behavior and a
consequence, or even know that a consequence has oc-
curred, for reinforcement to "work."

Reinforcement
Reinforcement is the most important principle of behav-
ior and a key element of most behavior change programs
designed by behavior analysts (Flora, 2004; Northup,
Vollmer, & Serrett, 1993). If a behavior is followed
Operant Conditioning Occurs Automatically
Operant conditioning does not require a person's aware-
ness. "A reinforcing connection need not be obvious to
the individual [whose behavior is] reinforced" (Skinner,
1953, p. 75, words in brackets added). This statement
refers to the automaticity of reinforcement; that is, be-
havior is modified by its consequences regardless of
whether the individual is aware that she is being re-
inforced." A person does not have to understand or
verbalize the relation between her behavior and a
consequence, or even know that a consequence has oc-
curred, for reinforcement to "work."

Reinforcement
Reinforcement is the most important principle of behav-
ior and a key element of most behavior change programs
designed by behavior analysts (Flora, 2004; Northup,
Vollmer, & Serrett, 1993). If a behavior is followed
closely in time by a stimulus event and as a result the fu-
ture frequency of that type of behavior increases in sim-
ilar conditions, reinforcement has taken place.'
Sometimes the delivery of just one reinforcer results in
significant behavior change, although most often several
responses must be followed by reinforcement before sig-
nificant conditioning will occur.
Most stimulus changes that function as reinforcers
can be described operationally as either (a) a new stim-
ulus added to the environment (or increased in intensity),
or (b) an already present stimulus removed from the en-
vironment (or reduced in intensity). 13 These two opera-
tions provide for two forms of reinforcement, called
positive and negative (see Figure 2).
Positive reinforcement occurs when a behavior is
followed immediately by the presentation of a stimulus
and, as a result, occurs more often in the future. Our
baby's increased frequency of batting the mobile with
her hands, when doing so produces movement and music,
is an example of positive reinforcement. Likewise, a
child's independent play is reinforced when it increases
as a result of his parent's giving praise and attention when
he plays.
When the frequency of a behavior increases because
past responses have resulted in the withdrawal or termi-
nation of a stimulus, the operation is called negative re-
inforcement. Skinner (1953) used the term aversive
stimulus to refer to, among other things, stimulus con-
ditions whose termination functioned as reinforcement.
Let us assume now that a parent programs the mobile to
automatically play music for a period of time. Let us also
assume that if the baby bats the mobile with hands or
feet, the music immediately stops for a few seconds. If the
baby bats the mobile more frequently when doing so ter-
minates the music, negative reinforcement is at work, and
the music can be called aversive.
Negative reinforcement is characterized by escape
or avoidance contingencies. The baby escaped the music
by striking the mobile with her hand. A person who jumps
out of the shower when water suddenly becomes too hot
Figure 2 Positive and negative re-
inforcement and positive and negative
punishment are defined by the type of
stimulus change operation that immedi-
ately follows a behavior and the effect that
operation has on the future frequency of
that type of behavior.
Figure 2 Positive and negative re-
inforcement and positive and negative
punishment are defined by the type of
stimulus change operation that immedi-
ately follows a behavior and the effect that
operation has on the future frequency of
that type of behavior.
escapes the overly hot water. Likewise, when the fre-
quency of a student's disruptive behavior increases as a
result of being sent to the principal's office, negative re-
inforcement has occurred. By acting out, the misbehav-
ing student escapes (or avoids altogether, depending on
the timing of his misbehavior) the aversive (to him) class-
room activity.
The concept of negative reinforcement has confused
many students of behavior analysis. Much of the confu-
sion can be traced to the inconsistent early history and
development of the term and to psychology and education
textbooks and professors who have used the term inac-
curately. '* The most common mistake is equating nega-
tive reinforcement with punishment. To help avoid the
error, Michael (2004) suggested the following:
Think about how you would respond if someone asked
you (1) whether or not you like negative reinforcement;
also if you were asked (2) which you prefer, positive or
negative reinforcement. Your answer to the first question
should be that you do indeed like negative reinforce-
ment, which consists of the removal or termination of an
aversive condition that is already present. The term
negative reinforcement refers only to the termination of
the stimulus. In a laboratory procedure the stimulus
must, of course, be turned on and then its termination
can be made contingent upon the critical response. No
one wants an aversive stimulus turned on, but once it is
on, its termination is usually desirable. Your answer to
the second question should be that you cannot choose
without knowing the specifies of the positive and nega-
tive reinforcement involved. The common error is to
choose positive reinforcement, but removal of a very se-
vere pain would certainly be preferred over the presenta-
tion of a small monetary reward or an edible, unless the
food deprivation was very severe. (p. 32, italics and bold
type in original)
Remembering that the term reinforcement always
means an increase in response rate and that the modifiers
positive and negative describe the type of stimulus change
operation that best characterizes the consequence (i.e.,
adding or withdrawing a stimulus) should facilitate the
discrimination of the principles and application of posi-
tive and negative reinforcement.
After a behavior has been established with rein-
forcement, it need not be reinforced each time it occurs.
Many behaviors are maintained at high levels by sched-
ules of intermittent reinforcement. However, if rein-
forcement is withheld for all members of a previously
reinforced response class, a procedure based on the prin-
ciple of extinction, the frequency of the behavior will
gradually decrease to its prereinforcement level or cease
to occur altogether.
Punishment
Punishment, like reinforcement, is defined functionally.
When a behavior is followed by a stimulus change that
decreases the future frequency of that type of behavior in
similar conditions, punishment has taken place. Also,
like reinforcement, punishment can be accomplished by
either of two types of stimulus change operations. (See
the bottom two boxes of Figure 2.)
Although most behavior analysts support the defi-
nition of punishment as a consequence that decreases
the future frequency of the behavior it follows (Azrin &
Holz, 1966), a wide variety of terms have been used in
the literature to refer to the two types of consequence
operations that fit the definition. For example, the Be-
havior Analyst Certification Board (BACB, 2005) and
textbook authors (e.g., Miltenberger, 2004) use the
terms positive punishment and negative punishment,
paralleling the terms positive reinforcement and negative
reinforcement. As with reinforcement, the modifiers
positive and negative used with punishment connote nei-
ther the intention nor the desirability of the behavior
change produced; they only specify how the stimulus
change that served as the punishing consequence was
affected-whether it was presented (positive) or with-
drawn (negative).
Although the terms positive punishment and
negative punishment are consistent with the terms used
to differentiate the two reinforcement operations, they
are less clear than the descriptive terms for the two pun-
ishment operations— punishment by contingent stimu-
lation and punishment by contingent withdrawal of a
positive reinforcer-first introduced by Whaley and
Malott (1971) in their classic text, Elementary Princi-
ples of Behavior. These terms highlight the procedural
difference between the two forms of punishment. Dif-
ferences in procedure as well as in the type of stimulus
change involved-reinforcer or punisher-hold im-
portant implications for application when a punish-
ment-based behavior-reduction technique is indicated.
Foxx (1982) introduced the terms Type I punishment
and Type Il punishment for punishment by contingent
stimulation and punishment by contingent withdrawal
of a stimulus, respectively. Many behavior analysts and
teachers continue to use Foxx's terminology today.
Other terms such as penalty principle have also been
used to refer to negative punishment. (Malott & Tro-
jan Suarez, 2004). However, it should be remembered
that these terms are simply brief substitutes for the
more complete terminology introduced by Whaley and
Malott.
As with positive and negative reinforcement, nu-
merous behavior change procedures incorporate the two
basic punishment operations. Although some textbooks
reserve the term punishment for procedures involving
positive (or Type I) punishment and describe time-out
from positive reinforcement and response cost as sepa-
rate "principles" or types of punishment, both the meth-
ods for reducing behavior are derivatives of negative (or
Type Il) punishment. Therefore, time-out and response
cost should be considered behavior change tactics and
not basic principles of behavior.
Reinforcement and punishment can each be accom-
plished by either of two different operations, depending
on whether the consequence consists of presenting a new
stimulus (or increasing the intensity of a current stimu-
lus) or withdrawing (or decreasing the intensity of) a cur-
rently present stimulus in the environment (Morse &
Kelleher, 1977; Skinner, 1953). Some behavior analysts
argue that from a functional and theoretical standpoint
only two principles are required to describe the basic ef-
fects of behavioral consequences—reinforcement and
punishment. '5 However, from a procedural perspective
(a critical factor for the applied behavior analyst), a num-
ber of behavior change tactics are derived from each of
the four operations represented in Figure 2.
Most behavior change procedures involve several
principles of behavior (see Box 2). It is critical for the
behavior analyst to have a solid conceptual understand-
ing of the basic principles of behavior. Such knowledge
permits better analysis of current controlling variables as
well as more effective design and assessment of behav-
ioral interventions that recognize the role various princi-
ples may be playing in a given situation.Stimulus Changes That Function
as Reinforcers and Punishers
Because operant conditioning involves the consequences
of behavior, it follows that anyone interested in using op-
erant conditioning to change behavior must identify and
control the occurrence of relevant consequences. For the
applied behavior analyst, therefore, an important ques-
tion becomes, What kinds of stimulus changes function
as reinforcers and punishers?
Unconditioned Reinforcement
and Punishment
Some stimulus changes function as reinforcement even
though the organism has had no particular learning his-
tory with those stimuli. A stimulus change that can in-
crease the future frequency of behavior without prior
pairing with any other form of reinforcement is called an
unconditioned reinforcer.' For example, stimuli such
as food, water, and sexual stimulation that support the
biological maintenance of the organism and survival of
the species often function as unconditioned reinforcers.
The words can and often in the two previous sentences
recognize the important qualification that the momentary
effectiveness of an unconditioned reinforcer is a function
of current motivating operations. For example, a cer-
tain level of food deprivation is necessary for the pre-
sentation of food to function as a reinforcer. However,
food is unlikely to function as reinforcement for a person
who has recently eaten a lot of food (a condition of sat-
iation).
Similarly, an unconditioned punisher is a stimulus
change that can decrease the future frequency of any be-
havior that precedes it without prior pairing with any
other form of punishment. Unconditioned punishers in-
clude painful stimulation that can cause tissue damage
(i.e., harm body cells). However, virtually any stimulus
to which an organism's receptors are sensitive-light,
sound, and temperature, to name a few-can be intensi-
fied to the point that its delivery will suppress behavior
even though the stimulus is below levels that actually
cause tissue damage (Bijou & Baer, 1965).
Events that function as unconditioned reinforcers and
punishers are the product of the natural evolution of the
species (phylogeny). Malott, Tillema, and Glenn (1978)
described the natural selection of "rewards" and "aver-
sives" as follows:17
Some rewards and aversives control our actions because
of the way our species evolved; we call these unlearned
rewards or aversives. We inherit a biological structure
that causes some stimuli to be rewarding or aversive.
This structure evolved because rewards helped our an-
cestors survive, while aversives hurt their survival. Some
of these unlearned rewards, such as food and fluid, help
us survive by strengthening our body cells. Others help
our species survive by causing us to produce and care
for our offspring-these stimuli include the rewarding
stimulation resulting from copulation and nursing. And
many unlearned aversives harm our survival by damag-
ing our body cells; such aversives include burns, cuts
and bruises. (p. 9)
While unconditioned reinforcers and punishers are
critically important and necessary for survival, relatively
few behaviors that comprise the everyday routines of peo-
ple as they go about working, playing, and socializing
are directly controlled by such events. For example, al-
though going to work each day earns the money that buys
food, eating that food is far too delayed for it to exert any
direct operant control over the behavior that earned it.
Remember: Behavior is most affected by its immediate
consequences.
Box 2
Distinguishing between Principles
of Behavior and Behavior Change Tactics
A principle of behavior describes a basic behavior-en-
vironment relation that has been demonstrated repeat-
edly in hundreds, even thousands, of experiments. A
principle of behavior describes a functional relation
between behavior and one or more of its controlling vari-
ables (in the form of y = fx) that has thorough generality
across individual organisms, species, settings, and be-
haviors. A principle of behavior is an empirical general-
ization inferred from many experiments. Principles
describe how behavior works. Some examples of prin-
ciples are reinforcement, punishment, and extinction.
In general, a behavior change tactic is a method for
operationalizing, or putting into practice, the knowledge
provided by one or more principles of behavior. A be-
havior change tactic is a research-based, technologi-
cally consistent method for changing behavior that has
been derived from one or more basic principles of be-
havior and that possesses sufficient generality across sub-
jects, settings, and/or behaviors to warrant its codification
and dissemination. Behavior change tactics constitute the
technological aspect of applied behavior analysis. Ex-
amples of behavior change procedures include backward
chaining, differential reinforcement of other behavior,
shaping, response cost, and time-out.
So, principles describe how behavior works, and be-
havior change tactics are how applied behavior analysts
put the principles to work to help people learn and use so-
cially significant behaviors. There are relatively few prin-
ciples of behavior, but there are many derivative behavior
change tactics. To illustrate further, reinforcement is a
behavioral principle because it describes a lawful rela-
tion between behavior, an immediate consequence, and
an increased frequency of the behavior in the future under
similar conditions. However, the issuance of checkmarks
in a token economy or the use of contingent social praise
are behavior change tactics derived from the principle of
reinforcement. To cite another example, punishment is a
principle behavior because it describes the established
relations between the presentation of a consequence and
the decreased frequency of similar behavior in the fu-
ture. Response cost and time-out, on the other hand, are
methods for changing behavior; they are two different
tactics used by practitioners to operationalize the princi-
ple of punishment.
Conditioned Reinforcers and Punishers
Stimulus events or conditions that are present or that
occur just before or simultaneous with the occurrence of
other reinforcers (or punishers) may acquire the ability to
reinforce (or punish) behavior when they later occur on
their own as consequences. Called conditioned rein-
forcers and conditioned punishers, these stimulus
changes function as reinforcers and punishers only be-
cause of their prior pairing with other reinforcers or pun-
ishers.'* The stimulus-stimulus pairing procedure
responsible for the creation of conditioned reinforcers or
punishers is the same as that used for respondent condi-
tioning except that the "outcome is a stimulus that func-
tions as a reinforcer (or punisher] rather than a stimulus
that will elicit a response" (Michael, 2004, p. 66, words
in brackets added).
Conditioned reinforcers and punishers are not related
to any biological need or anatomical structure; their abil-
ity to modify behavior is a result of each person's unique
history of interactions with his or her environment (on-
togeny). Because no two people experience the world in
exactly the same way, the roster of events that can serve
as conditioned reinforcers and punishers at any particu-
lar time (given a relevant motivating operation) is idio-
syncratic to each individual and always changing. On the
other hand, to the extent that two people have had simi-
lar experiences (e.g., schooling, profession, the culture
in general), they are likely to be affected in similar ways
to many similar events. Social praise and attention are
examples of widely effective conditioned reinforcers in
our culture. Because social attention and approval (as
well as disapproval) are often paired with so many other
reinforcers (and punishers), they exert powerful con-
trol over human behavior and will be featured when spe-
cific tactics for changing behavior are presented.
Because people who live in a common culture share
similar histories, it is not unreasonable for a practitioner
to search for potential reinforcers and punishers for a
given client among classes of stimuli that have proven
effective with other similar clients. However, in an effort
to help the reader establish a fundamental understanding
of the nature of operant conditioning, we have purposely
avoided presenting a list of stimuli that may function as
reinforcers and punishers. Morse and Kelleher (1977)
made this important point very well.
Reinforcers and punishers, as environmental "things,"
appear to have a greater reality than orderly temporal
changes in ongoing behavior. Such a view is deceptive.
There is no concept that predicts reliably when events
will be reinforcers or punishers; the defining character-
istics of reinforcers and punishers are how they change
behavior [italics added). Events that increase or de-
crease the subsequent occurrence of one response may
not modify other responses in the same way.
In characterizing reinforcement as the presentation
of a reinforcer contingent upon a response, the tendency
is to emphasize the event and to ignore the importance
of both the contingent relations and the antecedent and
subsequent behavior. It is how [italics added] they
change behavior that defines the terms reinforcer and
punisher; thus it is the orderly change in behavior that
is the key to these definitions. It is not [italics added]
appropriate to presume that particular environmental
events such as the presentation of food or electric shock
are reinforcers or punishers until a change in the rate of
responding has occurred when the event is scheduled in
relation to specified responses.
A stimulus paired with a reinforcer is said to have
become a conditioned reinforcer, but actually it is the
behaving subject that has changed, not the stimulus....
It is, of course, useful shorthand to speak of conditioned
reinforcers ... just as it is convenient to speak about a
reinforcer rather than speaking about an event that has
followed an instance of a specific response and resulted
in a subsequent increase in the occurrence of similar re-
sponses. The latter may be cumbersome, but it has the
advantage of empirical referents. Because many differ-
ent responses can be shaped by consequent events, and
because a given consequent event is often effective in
modifying the behavior of different individuals, it be-
comes common practice to refer to reinforcers without
specifying the behavior that is being modified. These
common practices have unfortunate consequences. They
lead to erroneous views that responses are arbitrary and
that the reinforcing or punishing effect of an event is a
specific property of the event itself. (pp. 176-177, 180)
The point made by Morse and Kelleher (1977) is of
paramount importance to understanding behavior-
environment relations. Reinforcement and punishment
are not simply the products of certain stimulus events,
which are then called reinforcers and punishers without
reference to a given behavior and environmental condi-
tions. There are no inherent or standard physical proper-
ties of stimuli that determine their permanent status as
reinforcers and punishers. In fact, a stimulus can func-
tion as a positive reinforcer under one set of conditions
and a negative reinforcer under different conditions. Just
as positive reinforcers are not defined with terms such as
pleasant or satisfying, aversive stimuli should not be de-
fined with terms such as annoying or unpleasant. The
terms reinforcer and punisher should not to be used on the
basis of a stimulus event's assumed effect on behavior or
on any inherent property of the stimulus event itself.
Morse and Kelleher (1977) continued:
When the borders of the table are designated in terms of
stimulus classes (positive-negative; pleasant-noxious)
and experimental operations (stimulus presentation-
stimulus withdrawal), the cells of the table are, by defin-
ition, varieties of reinforcement and punishment. One
problem is that the processes indicated in the cells have
already been assumed in categorizing stimuli as positive
or negative; a second is that there is a tacit assumption
that the presentation or withdrawal of a particular stimu-
lus will have an invariant effect. These relations are
clearer if empirical operations are used to designate the
border conditions. ... The characterization of behavioral
processes depends upon empirical observations. The
same stimulus event, under different conditions, may in-
crease behavior or decrease behavior. In the former case
the process is called reinforcement and in the latter the
process is called punishment. (p. 180)
At the risk of redundancy, we will state this impor-
tant concept again. Reinforcers and punishers denote
functional classes of stimulus events, the membership to
which is not based on the physical nature of the stimulus
changes or events themselves. Indeed, given a person's in-
dividual history and current motivational state, and the
current environmental conditions, "any stimulus change
can be a 'reinforcer' if the characteristics of the change,
and the temporal relation of the change to the response
under observation, are properly selected" (Schoenfeld,
1995, p. 184). Thus, the phrase "everything is relative"
is thoroughly relevant to understanding functional
behavior-environment relations.
The Discriminated Operant
and Three-Term Contingency
We have discussed the role of consequences in influenc-
ing the future frequency of behavior. But operant condi-
tioning does much more than establish a functional
relation between behavior and its consequences. Oper-
ant conditioning also establishes functional relations be-
tween behavior and certain antecedent conditions.
In contrast to if-A-then-B formulations (such as S-R for-
mulations), the AB-because-of-C formulation is a gen-
eral statement that the relation between an event (B) and
its context (A) is because of consequences (C). ... Ap-
plied to Skinner's three-term contingency, the relation
between (A) the setting and (B) behavior exists because
of (C) consequences that occurred for previous AB
(setting-behavior) relations. The idea [is] that reinforce-
ment strengthens the setting-behavior relation rather than
simply strengthening behavior. (Moxley, 2004, p. 111)
Reinforcement selects not just certain forms of be-
havior; it also selects the environmental conditions that in
the future will evoke (increase) instances of the response
class. A behavior that occurs more frequently under some
antecedent conditions than it does in others is called a
discriminated operant. Because a discriminated operant
occurs at a higher frequency in the presence of a given
stimulus than it does in the absence of that stimulus, it is
said to be under stimulus control. Answering the phone,
one of the everyday behaviors discussed by the professor
and his students in Box 1, is a discriminated operant.
The telephone's ring functions as a discriminative stim-
ulus (S") for answering the phone. We answer the phone
when it is ringing, and we do not answer the phone when
it is silent.Just as reinforcers or punishers cannot be identified
by their physical characteristics, stimuli possess no in-
herent dimensions or properties that enable them to func-
tion as discriminative stimuli. Operant conditioning
brings behavior under the control of various properties
or values of antecedent stimuli (e.g., size, shape, color,
spatial relation to another stimulus), and what those fea-
tures are cannot be determined a priori.
Any stimulus present when an operant is reinforced ac-
quires control in the sense that the rate will be higher
when it is present. Such a stimulus does not act as a
goad; it does not elicit the response in the sense of forc-
ing it to occur. It is simply an essential aspect of the oc-
casion upon which a response is made and reinforced.
The difference is made clear by calling it a discrimina-
tive stimulus (or S"). An adequate formulation of the in-
teraction between an organism and its environment must
always specify three things: (1) the occasion upon which
a response occurs; (2) the response itself; and (3) the re-
inforcing consequences. The interrelationships among
them are the "contingencies of reinforcement." (Skinner,
1969, р. 7)
The discriminated operant has its origin in the three-
term contingency. The three-term contingency-
antecedent, behavior, and consequence—is sometimes
Figure 3 Three-term contingencies illustrating reinforcement and punishment operations.
Future Frequency
Antecedent Stimulus Behavior Consequence of Behavior in Operation
Similar Conditions

"Name a carnivorous
dinosaur.* "Tyrannosaurus Rex." "Well done!" 1 Positive
Reinforcement

Foul smell under
kitchen sink Take trash outside Foul smell is gone 1 Negative
Reinforcement

Icy road Drive at normal speed Crash into car ahead
Positive
Punishment

Popup box asks, "Warn
when deleting unread Click on "No" Important e-mail Negative
messages?" message is lost Punishment
called the ABCs of behavior analysis. Figure 3 shows
examples of three-term contingencies for positive rein-
forcement, negative reinforcement, positive punishment,
and negative punishment. " Most of what the science of
behavior analysis has discovered about the prediction and
control of human behavior involves the three-term con-
tingency, which is "considered the basic unit of analysis
in the analysis of operant behavior" (Glenn, Ellis, &
Greenspoon, 1992, p. 1332).
The term contingency appears in behavior analysis
literature with several meanings signifying various types
of temporal and functional relations between behavior
and antecedent and consequent variables (Lattal, 1995;
Lattal & Shahan, 1997; Vollmer & Hackenberg, 2001).
Perhaps the most common connotation of contingency
refers to the dependency of a particular consequence on
the occurrence of the behavior. When a reinforcer (or
punisher) is said to be contingent on a particular behav-
ior, the behavior must be emitted for the consequence to
occur. For example, after saying, "Name a carnivorous
dinosaur," a teacher's "Well done!" depends on the stu-
dent's response, "Tyrannosaurus Rex" (or another di-
nosaur of the same class). 20
The term contingency is also used in reference to the
temporal contiguity of behavior and its consequences. As
stated previously, behavior is selected by the con-
sequences that immediately follow it, irrespective of
whether those consequences were produced by or de-
pended on the behavior. This is the meaning of contin-
gency in Skinner's (1953) statement, "So far as the
organism is concerned, the only important property of
the contingency is temporal" (1953, p. 85).
Recognizing the Complexity
of Human Behavior
Behavior-human or otherwise—remains an extremely
difficult subject matter.
-B. F. Skinner (1969, p. 114)
The experimental analysis of behavior has discovered a
number of basic principles-statements about how be-
havior works as a function of environmental variables.
These principles, several of which have been introduced
in this chapter, have been demonstrated, verified, and
replicated in hundreds and even thousands of experi-
ments; they are scientific facts.? Tactics for changing be-
havior derived for these principles have also been applied,
in increasingly sophisticated and effective ways, to a wide
range of human behaviors in natural settings. A summary
of what has been learned from many of those applied be-
havior analyses comprises the majority of this book.
The systematic application of behavior analysis tech-
niques sometimes produces behavior changes of great
magnitude and speed, even for clients whose behavior
had been unaffected by other forms of treatment and ap-
peared intractable. When such a happy (but not rare) out-
come occurs, the neophyte behavior analyst must resist
the tendency to believe that we know more than we do
about the prediction and control of human behavior.
Applied behavior analysis is a young science that has yet
to achieve anything near a complete understanding and
technological control of human behavior.
A major challenge facing applied behavior analysis
lies in dealing with the complexity of human behavior, es-
pecially in applied settings where laboratory controls are
impossible, impractical, or unethical. Many of the fac-
tors that contribute to the complexity of behavior stem
from three general sources: the complexity of the human
repertoire, the complexity of controlling variables, and
individual differences.
Complexity of the Human Repertoire
Humans are capable of learning an incredible range of
behaviors. Response sequences, sometimes of no appar-
ent logical organization, contribute to the complexity of
behavior (Skinner, 1953). In a response chain, effects
produced by one response influence the emission of other
responses. Returning a winter coat to the attic leads to
rediscovering a scrapbook of old family photographs,
which evokes a phone call to Aunt Helen, which sets the
occasion for finding her recipe for apple pie, and so on.
Verbal behavior may be the most significant con-
tributor to the complexity of human behavior (Donahoe
& Palmer, 1994; Michael, 2003; Palmer, 1991; Skinner,
1957). Not only is a problem generated when the differ-
ence between saying and doing is not recognized, but
verbal behavior itself is often a controlling variable for
many other verbal and nonverbal behaviors.
Operant learning does not always occur as a slow,
gradual process. Sometimes new, complex, repertoires
appear quickly with little apparent direct conditioning
(Epstein, 1991; Sidman, 1994). One type of rapid learn-
ing has been called contingency adduction, a process
whereby a behavior that was initially selected and shaped
under one set of conditions is recruited by a different
set of contingencies and takes on a new function in the
person's repertoire (Adronis, 1983; Layng & Adronis,
1984). Johnson and Layng (1992, 1994) described sev-
eral examples of contingency adduction in which sim-
ple (component) skills (e.g., addition, subtraction, and
multiplication facts, isolating and solving for X in a sim-
ple linear equation), when taught to fluency, combined
without apparent instruction to form new complex (com-
posite) patterns of behavior (e.g., factoring complex
equations).
Intertwined lineages of different operants combine
to form new complex operants (Glenn, 2004), which pro-
duce response products that in turn make possible the ac-
quisition of behaviors beyond the spatial and mechanical
restraints of anatomical structure.
In the human case, the range of possibilities may be infi-
nite, especially because the products of operant behavior
have become increasingly complex in the context of
evolving cultural practices. For example, anatomical
constraints prevented operant flying from emerging in a
human repertoire only until airplanes were constructed
as behavioral products. Natural selection's leash has
been greatly relaxed in the ontogeny of operant units.
(Glenn et al., 1992, p. 1332)
Complexity of Controlling Variables
Behavior is selected by its consequences. This megaprin-
ciple of operant behavior sounds deceptively (and naively)
simple. However, "Like other scientific principles, its
simple form masks the complexity of the universe it de-
scribes" (Glenn, 2004, p. 134). The environment and its
effects on behavior are complex.
Skinner (1957) noted that, "(1) the strength of a sin-
gle response may be, and usually is, a function of more
than one variable and (2) a single variable usually affects
more than one response" (p. 227). Although Skinner was
writing in reference to verbal behavior, multiple causes
and multiple effects are characteristics of many behavior-
environment relations. Behavioral covariation illustrates
one type of multiple effect. For example, Sprague and
Horner (1992) found that blocking the emission of one
problem behavior decreased the frequency of that be-
havior but produced a collateral increase in other topogra-
phies of problem behaviors in the same functional class.
As another example of multiple effects, the presentation
of an aversive stimulus may, in addition to suppressing
the future occurrences of the behavior it follows, elicit
respondent behaviors and evoke escape and avoidance
behaviors-three different effects from one event.
Many behaviors are the result of multiple causes. In
a phenomena called joint control (Lowenkron, 2004), two
discriminative stimuli can combine to evoke a common
response class. Concurrent contingencies can also com-
bine to make a behavior more or less likely to occur in a
given situation. Perhaps we finally return our neighbor's
weed trimmer not just because he usually invites us in for
a cup of coffee, but also because returning the tool re-
duces the "guilt" we are feeling for keeping it for 2 weeks.
Concurrent contingencies often vie for control of in-
compatible behaviors. We cannot watch "Baseball
Tonight" and study (properly) for an upcoming exam. Al-
though not a technical term in behavior analysis,
algebraic summation is sometimes used to describe the
effect of multiple, concurrent contingencies on behavior.
The behavior that is emitted is thought to be the product
of the competing contingencies "canceling portions of
each other out" as in an equation in algebra.
Hierarchies of response classes within what was pre-
sumed to be a single response class may be under multi-
ple controlling variables. For example, Richman, Wacker,
Asmus, Casey, and Andelman (1999) found that one
topography of aggressive behavior was maintained by one
type of reinforcement contingency while another form of
aggression was controlled by a different contingency.
All of these complex, concurrent, interrelated con-
tingencies make it difficult for behavior analysts to iden-
tify and control relevant variables. It should not be
surprising that the settings in which applied behavior an-
alysts ply their trade are sometimes described as places
where "reinforcement occurs in a noisy background"
(Vollmer & Hackenberg, 2001, p. 251).
Consequently, as behavior analysts, we should rec-
ognize that meaningful behavior change might take time
and many trials and errors as we work to understand the
interrelationships and complexities of the controlling vari-
ables. Don Baer (1987) recognized that some of the larger
problems that beset society (e.g., poverty, substance ad-
diction, illiteracy), given our present level of technology,
might be too difficult to solve. He identified three barri-
ers to solving such complex problems:
(a) We are not empowered to solve these bigger remain-
ing problems, (b) we have not yet made the analysis of
how to empower ourselves to try them, and (c) we have
not yet made the system-analytic task analyses that will
prove crucial to solving those problems when we do em-
power ourselves sufficiently to try them.... In my ex-
perience, those projects that seem arduously long are
arduous because (a) I do not have a strong interim rein-
forcer compared to those in the existing system for sta-
tus quo and must wait for opportunities when weak
control may operate, even so, or (b) I do not yet have a
correct task analysis of the problem and must struggle
through trials and errors. By contrast (c) when I have an
effective interim reinforcer and I know the correct task
analysis of this problem, long problems are simply those
in which the task analysis requires a series of many be-
havior changes, perhaps in many people, and although
each of them is relatively easy and quick, the series of
them requires not so much effort as time, and so it is not
arduous but merely tedious. (pp. 335, 336-337)
Individual Differences
You did not need to read this textbook to know that peo-
ple often respond very differently to the same set of en-
vironmental conditions. The fact of individual differences
is sometimes cited as evidence that principles of behav-
ior based on environmental selection do not exist, at least
not in a form that could provide the basis for a robust and
reliable technology of behavior change. It is then argued
that because people often respond differently to the same
set of contingencies, control of behavior must come from
within each person.
As each of us experiences varying contingencies of
reinforcement (and punishment), some behaviors are
strengthened (selected by the contingencies) and others
are weakened. This is the nature of operant conditioning,
which is to say, human nature. Because no two people
ever experience the world in exactly the same way, each
of us arrives at a given situation with a different history
of reinforcement. The repertoire of behaviors each per-
son brings to any situation has been selected, shaped, and
maintained by his or her unique history of reinforcement.
Each human's unique repertoire defines him or her as a
person. We are what we do, and we do what we have
learned to do. "He begins as an organism and becomes a
person or self as he acquires a repertoire of behavior"
(Skinner, 1974, p. 231).
Individual differences in responding to current stim-
ulus conditions, then, do not need to be attributed to dif-
ferences in internal traits or tendencies, but to the orderly
result of different histories of reinforcement. The behav-
ior analyst must also consider people's varying sensitiv-
ities to stimuli (e.g., hearing loss, visual impairment) and
differences in response mechanisms (e.g., cerebral palsy)
and design program components to ensure that all par-
ticipants have maximum contact with relevant contin-
gencies (Heward, 2006).
Additional Obstacles to Controlling
Behavior in Applied Settings
Compounding the difficulty of tackling the complexity
of human behavior in the "noisy" applied settings where
people live, work, and play, applied behavior anal-
ysts are sometimes prevented from implementing an
effective behavior change program due to logistical, fi-
nancial, sociopolitical, legal, and/or ethical factors. Most
applied behavior analysts work for agencies with lim-
ited resources, which may make the data collection re-
quired for a more complete analysis impossible. In
addition, participants, parents, administrators, and even
the general public may at times limit the behavior ana-
lyst's options for effective intervention (e.g., "We don't
want students working for tokens"). Legal or ethical con-
siderations may also preclude determining experimen-
tally the controlling variables for an important behavior.
Each of these practical complexities combines with
the behavioral and environmental complexities previously
mentioned to make the applied behavior analysis of so-
cially important behavior a challenging task. However, the
task need not be overwhelming, and few tasks are as re-
warding or as important for the betterment of humankind.
It is sometimes expressed that a scientific account of
behavior will somehow diminish the quality or enjoy-
ment of the human experience. For example, will our in-
creasing knowledge of the variables responsible for cre-
ative behavior lessen the feelings evoked by a powerful
painting or a beautiful symphony, or reduce our appreci-
ation of the artists who produced them? We think not,
and we encourage you, as you read and study about the
basic concepts introduced in this chapter and examined
in more detail throughout the book, to consider Nevin's
(2005) response to how a scientific account of behavior
adds immeasurably to the human experience:
At the end of Origin of Species (1859), Darwin invites
us to contemplate a tangled bank, with its plants and its
birds, its insects and its worms; to marvel at the com-
plexity, diversity, and interdependence of its inhabitants;
and to feel awe at the fact that all of it follows from the
laws of reproduction, competition, and natural selection.
Our delight in the tangled bank and our love for its in-
habitants are not diminished by our knowledge of the
laws of evolution; neither should our delight in the com-
plex world of human activity and our love for its actors
be diminished by our tentative but growing knowledge
of the laws of behavior. (Tony Nevin, personal commu-
nication, December 19, 2005)
Summary
Behavior
1. In general, behavior is the activity of living organisms.
2. Technically, behavior is "that portion of an organism's in-
teraction with its environment that is characterized by de-
tectable displacement in space through time of some part
of the organism and that results in a measurable change
in at least one aspect of the environment" (Johnston &
Pennypacker, 1993a, p. 23).
3. The term behavior is usually used in reference to a larger
set or class of responses that share certain topographical di-
mensions or functions.
4. Response refers to a specific instance of behavior.
5. Response topography refers to the physical shape or form
of behavior.
6. A response class is a group of responses of varying
topography, all of which produce the same effect on the
environment.
7. Repertoire can refer to all of the behaviors a person can do
or to a set of behaviors relevant to a particular setting or task.
Environment
8. Environment is the physical setting and circumstances
in which the organism or referenced part of the organ-
ism exists.
9. Stimulus is "an energy change that affects an organism
through its receptor cells" (Michael, 2004, p. 7).
10. The environment influences behavior primarily by stimu-
lus change, not static stimulus conditions.
11. Stimulus events can be described formally (by their phys-
ical features), temporally (by when they occur), and func-
tionally (by their effects on behavior).
12. A stimulus class is a group of stimuli that share specified
common elements along formal, temporal, and/or func-
tional dimensions.
13. Antecedent conditions or stimulus changes exist or occur
prior to the behavior of interest.
14. Consequences are stimulus changes that follow a behav-
ior of interest.
15. Stimulus changes can have one or both of two basic ef-
fects on behavior: (a) an immediate but temporary effect
of increasing or decreasing the current frequency of the
behavior, and/or (b) a delayed but relatively permanent ef-
fect in terms of the frequency of that type of behavior in
the future.
Respondent Behavior
16. Respondent behavior is elicited by antecedent stimuli.
17. A reflex is a stimulus-response relation consisting of an
antecedent stimulus and the respondent behavior it elicits
(e.g., bright light-pupil contraction).
18. All healthy members of a given species are born with the
same repertoire of unconditioned reflexes.
19. An unconditioned stimulus (e.g., food) and the respondent
behavior it elicits (e.g., salivation) are called unconditioned
reflexes.
20. Conditioned reflexes are the product of respondent con-
ditioning: a stimulus-stimulus pairing procedure in which
a neutral stimulus is presented with an unconditioned stim-
ulus until the neutral stimulus becomes a conditioned stim-
ulus that elicits the conditioned response.
21. Pairing a neutral stimulus with a conditioned stimulus can
also produce a conditioned reflex—a process called higher
order (or secondary) respondent conditioning.
22. Respondent extinction occurs when a conditioned stimu-
lus is presented repeatedly without the unconditioned stim-
ulus until the conditioned stimulus no longer elicits the
conditioned response.
Operant Behavior
23. Operant behavior is selected by its consequences.
24. Unlike respondent behavior, whose topography and basic
functions are predetermined, operant behavior can take a
virtually unlimited range of forms.
25. Selection of behavior by consequences operates during
the lifetime of the individual organism (ontogeny) and is
a conceptual parallel to Darwin's natural selection in the
evolutionary history of a species (phylogeny).
26. Operant conditioning, which encompasses reinforcement
and punishment, refers to the process and selective effects
of consequences on behavior:
• Consequences can affect only future behavior.
• Consequences select response classes, not individual
responses.
• Immediate consequences have the greatest effect.
• Consequences select any behavior that precedes them.
• Operant conditioning occurs automatically.
27. Most stimulus changes that function as reinforcers or pun-
ishers can be described as either (a) a new stimulus added
to the environment, or (b) an already present stimulus re-
moved from the environment.
28. Positive reinforcement occurs when a behavior is followed
immediately by the presentation of a stimulus that in-
creases the future frequency of the behavior.
29. Negative reinforcement occurs when a behavior is fol-
lowed immediately by the withdrawal of a stimulus that in-
creases the future frequency of the behavior.
30. The term aversive stimulus is often used to refer to stimulus
conditions whose termination functions as reinforcement.
31. Extinction (withholding all reinforcement for a previously
reinforced behavior) produces a decrease in response fre-
quency to the behavior's prereinforcement level.
32. Positive punishment occurs when a behavior is followed
by the presentation of a stimulus that decreases the future
frequency of the behavior.
33. Negative punishment occurs when a behavior is followed
immediately by the withdrawal of a stimulus that decreases
the future frequency of the behavior.
34. A principle of behavior describes a functional relation be-
tween behavior and one or more of its controlling vari-
ables that has thorough generality across organisms,
species, settings, and behaviors.
35. A behavior change tactic is a technologically consistent
method for changing behavior that has been derived from
one or more basic principles of behavior.
36. Unconditioned reinforcers and punishers function irre-
spective of any prior learning history.
37. Stimulus changes that function as conditioned reinforcers
and punishers do so because of previous pairing with other
reinforcers or punishers.
38. One important function of motivating operations is alter-
ing the current value of stimulus changes as reinforcement
or punishment. For example, deprivation and satiation are
motivating operations that make food more or less effec-
tive as reinforcement.
39. A discriminated operant occurs more frequently under
some antecedent conditions than it does under others, an
outcome called stimulus control.
40. Stimulus control refers to differential rates of operant re-
sponding observed in the presence or absence of an-
tecedent stimuli. Antecedent stimuli acquire the ability to
control operant behavior by having been paired with cer-
tain consequences in the past.
41. The three-term contingency-antecedent, behavior, and
consequence—is the basic unit of analysis in the analysis
of operant behavior.
42. If a reinforcer (or punisher) is contingent on a particular
behavior, the behavior must be emitted for the conse-
quence to occur.
43. All applied behavior analysis procedures involve ma-
nipulation of one or more components of the three-term
contingency.
Recognizing the Complexity of Human Behavior
44. Humans are capable of acquiring a huge repertoire of be-
haviors. Response chains and verbal behavior also make
human behavior extremely complex.
45. The variables that govern human behavior are often highly
complex. Many behaviors have multiple causes.
46. Individual differences in histories of reinforcement and
organic impairments also make the analysis and control
of human behavior difficult.
47. Applied behavior analysts are sometimes prevented from
conducting an effective analysis of behavior because of
practical, logistical, financial, sociopolitical, legal, and/or
ethical reasons.
Selecting and Defining
Target Behaviors
Key Terms
ABC recording ecological assessment reactivity
anecdotal observation function-based definition relevance of behavior rule
behavior checklist habilitation social validity
behavioral assessment normalization target behavior
behavioral cusp pivotal behavior topography-based definition
Applied behavior analysis is concerned with
producing predictable and replicable improve-
ments in behavior. However, not just any behav-
ior will do: Applied behavior analysts improve socially
important behaviors that have immediate and long-lasting
meaning for the person and for those who interact with
that person. For instance, applied behavior analysts de-
velop language, social, motor, and academic skills that
make contact with reinforcers and avoid punishers. An
important preliminary step involves choosing the right be-
haviors to target for measurement and change.
This chapter describes the role of assessment in ap-
plied behavior analysis, including preassessment con-
siderations, assessment methods used by behavior
analysts, issues in determining the social significance of
potential target behaviors, considerations for prioritizing
target behaviors, and the criteria and dimensions by which
selected behaviors should be defined to enable accurate
and reliable measurement.

Role of Assessment
in Applied Behavior Analysis
Assessment is considered a linchpin in a four-phase sys-
tematic intervention model that includes: assessment,
planning, implementation, and evaluation (Taylor, 2006).
Definition and Purpose
of Behavioral Assessment
Traditional psychological and educational assessments
typically involve a series of norm- and/or criterion-refer-
enced standardized tests to determine a person's strengths
and weaknesses within cognitive, academic, social, and/or
psychomotor domains. Behavioral assessment involves
a variety of methods including direct observations, inter-
views, checklists, and tests to identify and define targets
for behavior change. In addition to identifying behav-
iors) to change, comprehensive behavioral assessment
will discover resources, assets, significant others, com-
peting contingencies, maintenance and generalization fac-
tors, and potential reinforcers and/or punishers that may
inform or be included in intervention plans to change the
target behavior (Snell & Brown, 2006).'
Linehan (1977) offered a succinct and accurate de-
scription of the purpose of behavioral assessment: "To
figure out what the client's problem is and how to change
it for the better" (p. 31). Implicit in Linehan's statement
is the idea that behavioral assessment is more than an ex-
ercise in describing and classifying behavioral abilities
and deficiencies. Behavioral assessment goes beyond try-
ing to obtain a psychometric score, grade equivalent data,
or rating measure, as worthy as such findings might be
for other purposes. Behavioral assessment seeks to dis-
cover the function that behavior serves in the person's en-
vironment (e.g, positive reinforcement by social attention,
negative reinforcement by escape from a task). Results
of a comprehensive behavioral assessment give the be-
havior analyst a picture of variables that increase, de-
crease, maintain, or generalize the behavior of interest.
A well-constructed and thorough behavioral assessment
provides a roadmap from which the variables controlling
the behavior can be identified and understood. Conse-
quently, subsequent interventions can be aimed more
directly and have a much better chance of success.
As Bourret, Vollmer, and Rapp (2004) pointed out: "The
critical test of ... assessment is the degree to which it
differentially indicates an effective teaching strategy"
(p. 140).
Phases of Behavioral Assessment
Hawkins (1979) conceptualized behavioral assessment
as funnel shaped, with an initial broad scope leading to
an eventual narrow and constant focus. He described five
phases or functions of behavioral assessment: (a) screen-
ing and general disposition, (b) defining and generally
quantifying problems or desired achievement criteria, (c)
pinpointing the target behavior(s) to be treated, (d) mon-
itoring progress, and (e) following up. Although the five
phases form a general chronological sequence, there is
often overlap. This chapter is concerned with the prein-
tervention functions of assessment, the selection and de-
finition of a target behavior-the specific behavior
selected for change.
To serve competently, applied behavior analysts must
know what constitutes socially important behavior, have
the technical skills to use appropriate assessment meth-
ods and instruments, and be able to match assessment
data with an intervention strategy? For instance, the re-
medial reading specialist must understand the critical be-
haviors of a competent reader, be able to determine which
of those skills a beginning or struggling reader lacks, and
deliver an appropriate and effective instruction as inter-
vention. Likewise, the behaviorally trained marriage and
family therapist must be knowledgeable about the range
of behaviors that constitutes a functional family, be able
to assess family dynamics accurately, and provide so-
cially acceptable interventions that reduce dysfunctional
interactions. In short, any analyst must be knowledge-
able about the context of the target behavior.
A Pressessment Consideration
Before conducting an informal or formal behavioral as-
sessment for the purpose of pinpointing a target behav-
ior, the analyst must address the fundamental question,
Who has the authority, permission, resources, and skills
to complete an assessment and intervene with the be-
havior? If a practitioner does not have authority or per-
mission, then his role in assessment and intervention is
restricted. For example, suppose that a behavior analyst
is standing in a checkout line near a parent attempting to
manage an extremely disruptive child. Does the behavior
analyst have the authority or permission to assess the
problem or suggest an intervention to the parent? No.
However, if the same episode occurred after the parent
had requested assistance with such problems, the behav-
ior analyst could offer assessment and advice. In effect,
applied behavior analysts must not only recognize the
role of assessment in the assessment-intervention con-
tinuum, but also recognize those situations in which using
their knowledge and skills to assess and change behavior
13
is appropriate.
Assessment Methods Used
by Behavior Analysts
Four major methods for obtaining assessment information
are (a) interviews, (b) checklists, (c) tests, and (d) direct
observation. Interviews and checklists are indirect as-
sessment approaches because the data obtained from
these measures are derived from recollections, recon-
structions, or subjective ratings of events. Tests and direct
observation are considered direct assessment approaches
because they provide information about a person's
behavior as it occurs (Miltenberger, 2004). Although in-
direct assessment methods often provide useful infor-
mation, direct assessment methods are preferred because
they provide objective data on the person's actual per-
formance, not an interpretation, ranking, or qualitative
index of that performance (Hawkins, Mathews, & Ham-
dan, 1999; Heward, 2003). In addition to being aware
of these four major assessment methods, analysts can
provide further assistance to those they serve by increas-
ing their skills relative to the ecological implications of
assessment.
Interviews
Assessment interviews can be conducted with the target
person and/or with people who come into daily or regu-
lar contact with the individual (e.g., teachers, parents,
care providers).
Interviewing the Person
A behavioral interview is often a first and important step
in identifying a list of potential target behaviors, which
can be verified or rejected by subsequent direct observa-
tion. The interview can be considered a direct assessment
method when the person's verbal behavior is of interest
as a potential target behavior (Hawkins, 1975).
A behavioral interview differs from a traditional in-
terview by the type of questions asked and the level of in-
formation sought. Behavior analysts rely primarily on
what and when questions that focus on the environmen-
tal conditions that exist before, during, and after a be-
havioral episode, instead of why questions, which tend
to evoke mentalistic explanations that are of little value
in understanding the problem.
Asking the clients why they do something presumes
they know the answer and is often frustrating to clients,
because they probably do not know and it seems that
they should (Kadushin, 1972).
"Why" questions encourage the offering of "motiva-
tional" reasons that are usually uninformative such as
"I'm just lazy." Instead, the client could be asked "What
happens when ...?" One looks closely at what actually
happens in the natural environment. Attention is directed
toward behavior by questions that focus on it, such as,
"Can you give me an example of what (you do]?" When
one example is gained, then another can be requested
until it seems that the set of behaviors to which the
client refers when he employs a given word have been
identified. (Gambrill, 1977, p. 153)
Figure 1 provides examples of the kinds of what
and when questions that can be applied during a behav-
ioral assessment interview. This sequence of questions
was developed by a behavioral consultant in response to
a teacher who wanted to reduce the frequency of her neg-
ative reactions to acting out and disruptive students. Sim-
ilar questions could be generated to address situations in
homes or community settings (Sugai & Tindal, 1993).
The main purpose of the behavioral assessment in-
terview questions in Figure 1 is to identify variables
that occur before, during, and/or after the occurrence of
negative teacher attending behavior. Identifying envi-
ronmental events that correlate with the behavior pro-
vides valuable information for formulating hypotheses
about the controlling function of these variables and for
planning interventions. Hypothesis generation leads to
experimental manipulation and the discovery of func-
tional relations.
As an outgrowth of being interviewed, clients may
be asked to complete questionnaires or so-called needs
assessment surveys. Questionnaires and needs assessment
surveys have been developed in many human services
areas to refine or extend the interview process (Altschuld
& Witkin, 2000). Sometimes as a result of an initial in-
terview, the client is asked to self-monitor her behavior
in particular situations. Self-monitoring can entail writ-
ten or tape-recorded accounts of specific events.* Client-
collected data can be useful in selecting and defining target
behaviors for further assessment or for intervention. For
example, a client seeking behavioral treatment to quit
smoking might self-record the number of cigarettes he
smokes each day and the conditions when he smokes (e,g.,
morning coffee break, after dinner, stuck in a traffic jam).
These client-collected data may shed light on antecedent
conditions correlated with the target behavior.
Figure 1 Sample behavioral interview questions.
Problem Identification Interview Form
Reason for referral: The teacher requested help reducing her negative attention to acting
out and disruptive students who were yelling and noncompliant.
1. In your own words, can you define the problem behaviors that prompted your
request?
2. Are there any other teacher-based behaviors that concern you at this time?
3. When you engage in negative teacher attention (i.e., when you attend to yelling or
noncompliant behavior), what usually happens immediately before the negative
teacher attending behavior occurs?
4. What usually happens after the negative teacher attention behavior occurs?
5. What are the students' reactions when you yell or attend to their noncompliant
behavior?
6. What behaviors would the students need to perform so that you would be less likely
to attend to them in a negative way?
7. Have you tried other interventions? What has been their effect?
Interviewing Significant Others
Sometimes the behavior analyst either cannot interview
the client personally or needs information from others
who are important in the client's life (e.g., parents, teach-
ers, coworkers). In such cases, the analyst will interview
one or more of these significant others. When asked to de-
scribe a behavioral problem or deficit, significant others
often begin with general terms that do not identify spe-
cific behaviors to change and often imply causal factors
intrinsic to the client (e.g., she is afraid, aggressive, un-
motivated or lazy, withdrawn). By asking variations of
what, when, and how questions, the behavior analyst can
help significant others describe the problem in terms of
specific behaviors and environmental conditions and
events associated with those behaviors. For example, the
following questions could be used in interviewing par-
ents who have asked the behavior analyst for help be-
cause their child is "noncompliant" and "immature."
• What is Derek doing when you would be most
likely to call him immature or noncompliant?
• During what time of day does Derek seem most im-
mature (or noncompliant)? What does he do then?
• Are there certain situations or places where Derek
is noncompliant or acts immature? If so, where,
and what does he do?
• How many different ways does Derek act imma-
ture (or noncompliant)?
• What's the most frequent noncompliant thing that
Derek does?
• How do you and other family members respond
when Derek does these things?
• If Derek were to be more mature and independent
as you would like, what would he do differently
than he does now?
Figure 2 shows a form that parents or significant
others can use to begin to identify target behaviors.
In addition to seeking help from significant others in
identifying target behaviors and possible controlling vari-
ables that can help inform an intervention plan, the be-
havior analyst can sometimes use the interview to
determine the extent to which significant others are will-
ing and able to help implement an intervention to change
the behavior. Without the assistance of parents, siblings,
teacher aides, and staff, many behavior change programs
cannot be successful.
Checklists
Behavior checklists and rating scales can be used alone
or in combination with interviews to identify potential
target behaviors. A behavior checklist provides de-
scriptions of specific behaviors (usually in hierarchical
order) and the conditions under which each behavior
should occur. Situation- or program-specific checklists
can be created to assess one particular behavior (e.g.,
tooth brushing) or a specific skill area (e.g., a social skill),
but most practitioners use published checklists to rate a
wide range of areas (e.g., The Functional Assessment
Checklist for Teachers and Staff [March et al., 2000]).
Usually a Likert scale is used that includes informa-
tion about antecedent and consequence events that may
affect the frequency, intensity, or duration of behaviors.
For example, the Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL)
comes in teacher report, parent report, and child report
forms and can be used with children ages 5 through 18
(Achenbach & Edelbrock, 1991). The teacher's form in-
cludes 112 behaviors (e.g., "cries a lot," "not liked by
other pupils") that are rated on a 3-point scale: "not true,"
"somewhat or sometimes true," or "very true or often true."
The CBCL also includes items representing social com-
petencies and adaptive functioning such as getting along
with others and acting happy.
The Adaptive Behavior Scale-School (ABS-S)
(Lambert, Nihira, & Leland, 1993) is another frequently
used checklist for assessing children's adaptive behav-
ior. Part 1 of the ABS-S contains 10 domains related to in-
dependent functioning and daily living skills (e.g., eating,
toilet use, money handling, numbers, time); Part 2 as-
sesses the child's level of maladaptive (inappropriate) be-
havior in seven areas (e.g., trustworthiness, self-abusive
behavior, social engagement). Another version of the
Adaptive Behavior Scale, the ABS-RC, assesses adaptive
behavior in residential and community settings (Nihira,
Leland, & Lambert, 1993).
Information obtained from good behavior checklists
(i.e., those with objectively stated items of relevance to
the client's life) can help identify behaviors worthy of
more direct and intensive assessment.
Standardized Tests
Literally thousands of standardized tests and assessment
devices have been developed to assess behavior (cf., Spies
& Plake, 2005). Each time a standardized test is admin-
istered, the same questions and tasks are presented in a
specified way and the same scoring criteria and proce-
dures are used. Some standardized tests yield norm-
referenced scores. When a norm-referenced test is being
developed, it is administered to a large sample of people
selected at random from the population for whom the test
is intended. Test scores of people in the norming sample
are then used to represent how scores on the test are gen-
erally distributed throughout the population.
The majority of standardized tests on the market,
however, are not conducive to behavioral assessment be-
cause the results cannot be translated directly into target
behaviors for instruction or treatment. For example, re-
sults from standardized tests commonly used in the
schools, such as the lowa Tests of Basic Skills (Hoover,
Hieronymus, Dunbar, & Frisbie, 1996), the Peabody In-
dividual Achievement Test-R/NU (Markwardt, 2005), and
the Wide Range Achievement Test-3 (WRAT) (Wilkin-
son, 1994), might indicate that a fourth-grader is per-
forming at the third-grade level in mathematics and at
the first-grade level in reading. Such information might
be useful in determining how the student performs in
these subjects compared to students in general, but it nei-
ther indicates the specific math or reading skills the stu-
dent has mastered nor provides sufficient direct context
with which to launch an enrichment or remedial pro-
gram. Further, behavior analysts may not be able to ac-
tually administer a given test because of licensing
requirements. For instance, only a licensed psychologist
can administer some types of intelligence tests and per-
sonality inventories.
Tests are most useful as behavioral assessment de-
vices when they provide a direct measure of the person's
performance of the behaviors of interest. In recent years,
an increasing number of behaviorally oriented teachers
have recognized the value of criterion-referenced and
curriculum-based assessments to indicate exactly which
skills students need to learn and, equally important, which
skills they have mastered (Browder, 2001; Howell, 1998).
Curriculum-based assessments can be considered direct
measures of student performance because the data that
are obtained bear specifically on the daily tasks that the
student performs (Overton, 2006).

Direct Observation
Direct and repeated observations of the client's behavior
in the natural environment are the preferred method for
determining which behaviors to target for change. A basic
form of direct continuous observation, first described by
Bijou, Peterson, and Ault (1968), is called anecdotal ob-
servation, or ABC recording. With anecdotal observa-
tion the observer records a descriptive, temporally
sequenced account of all behaviors) of interest and the
antecedent conditions and consequences for those be-
haviors as those events occur in the client's natural envi-
ronment (Cooper, 1981). This technique produces
behavioral assessment data that can be used to identify
potential target behaviors.
Rather than providing data on the frequency of a spe-
cific behavior, anecdotal observation yields an overall
description of a client's behavior patterns. This detailed
record of the client's behavior within its natural context
provides accountability to the individual and to others in-
volved in the behavior change plan and is extremely help-
ful in designing interventions (Hawkins et al., 1999).
Accurately describing behavioral episodes as they
occur in real time is aided by using a form to record rel-
evant antecedents, behaviors, and consequences in tem-
poral sequence. For example, Lo (2003) used the form
shown in Figure 3 to record anecdotal observations of
a fourth-grade special education student whose teacher
had complained that the boy's frequent talk-outs and out-
of-seat behavior were impairing his learning and often
disrupted the entire class. (ABC observations can also be
recorded on a checklist of specific antecedents, behav-
iors, and consequent events individually created for the
client based on information from interviews and/or initial
observations.)
ABC recording requires the observer to commit full
attention to the person being observed. A classroom
teacher, for example, could not use this assessment pro-
cedure while engaging in other activities, such as man-
aging a reading group, demonstrating a mathematics
problem on the chalkboard, or grading papers. Anecdo-
tal observation is usually conducted for continuous peri-
ods of 20 to 30 minutes, and when responsibilities can
be shifted temporarily (e.g., during team teaching). Fol-
lowing are some additional guidelines and suggestions
for conducting anecdotal direct observations:
• Write down everything the client does and says
and everything that happens to the client.
Figure 3 Example of an anecdotal ABC recording form.
Student: Student 4 Date: 3/10/03 Setting: SED resource room (math period)
Observer. Experimenter Starting time: 2:40 PM. Ending time: 3:00 P.M.
Time Antecedents (A) Bchavior (B) Consequences (C)
2:40 T tells students to work Walks around the room T says, "Everyone is working.
quietly on their math and looks at other students but you. I don't need to
worksheets tell you what to do."
Sits down, makes funny noises A female peer says:"Would
with mouth you please be quiet?"
Says to the peer, "What? Me?* Peer continues to work
Stops making noiscs
2:41 Math worksheet Sits in his seat and works No one pays attention
quietly to him
Math worksheet Pounds on desk with hands SED aide asks him to stop
2:45 Math worksheet Makes vocal noises Ignored by others
Math worksheet Yells-out T's name three times T helps him with the
and walks to her with her questions
worksheet
2:47 Everyone is working quietly Gets up and leaves his seat Tasks him to sit down
and work
Sits down and works Ignored by others
Everyone is working quietly Gets up and talks to a peer T asks him to sit down
and work
Comes back to his seat Ignored by others
and works
2.55 Math workshect, no one is Hand grabs a male peer and Peer refuses
attending to him asks him to help on the
worksheet
Asks another male peer to Peer helps him
help him
2:58 Tells T he's finished the work T asks him to turn in his
and it's his turn to work on work and tells him that it's
computer not his turn on the
computer
Whines about why it's not T explains to him that other
his turn students are still working
on the computer and he
needs to find a book to read
Stands behind a peer who Ignored by T
is playing computer and
watches him play the game
• Use homemade shorthand or abbreviations to make
recording more efficient, but be sure the notes can
be and are accurately expanded immediately after
the observation session.
• Record only actions that are seen or heard, not in-
terpretations of those actions.
• Record the temporal sequence of each response of
interest by writing down what happened just before
and just after it.
• Record the estimated duration of each instance of
the client's behavior. Mark the beginning and end-
ing time of each behavioral episode.
• Be aware that continuous anecdotal observation is
often an obtrusive recording method. Most people
behave differently when they see someone with a
pencil and clipboard staring at them. Knowing this,
observers should be as unobtrusive as possible (e.g.,
stay a reasonable distance away from the subject).
• Carry out the observations over a period of several
days so that the novelty of having someone observe
the client will lessen and the repeated observations
can produce a valid picture of day-to-day behavior.
Ecological Assessment
Behavior analysts understand that human behavior is a
function of multiple events and that many events have
multiple effects on behavior (cf., Michael, 1995). An eco-
logical approach to assessment recognizes the complex
interrelationships between environment and behavior. In
an ecological assessment a great deal of information is
gathered about the person and the various environments
in which that person lives and works. Among the many
factors that can affect a person's behavior are physiolog-
ical conditions, physical aspects of the environment (e.g.,
lighting, seating arrangements, noise level), interactions
with others, home environment, and past reinforcement
history. Each of these factors represents a potential area
for assessment.
Although a thorough ecological assessment will pro-
vide a tremendous amount of descriptive data, the basic
purpose of assessment-to identify the most pressing be-
havior problem and possible ways to alleviate it—should
not be forgotten. It is easy to go overboard with the eco-
logical approach, gathering far more information than
necessary. Ecological assessment can be costly in terms
of professional and client time, and it may raise ethical
and perhaps legal questions regarding confidentiality
(Koocher & Keith-Spiegel, 1998). Ultimately, good judg-
ment must be used in determining how much assessment
information is necessary. Writing about the role of eco-
logical assessment for special education teachers, Heron
and Heward (1988) suggested that
The key to using an ecological assessment is to know
when to use it. Full-scale ecological assessments for
their own sake are not recommended for teachers
charged with imparting a great number of important
skills to many children in a limited amount of time. In
most cases, the time and effort spent conducting an ex-
haustive ecological assessment would be better used in
direct instruction. While the results of an ecological as-
sessment might prove interesting, they do not always
change the course of a planned intervention. Under what
conditions then will an ecological assessment yield data
that will significantly affect the course of treatment?
Herein lies the challenge. Educators must strive to be-
come keen discriminators of: (1) situations in which a
planned intervention has the potential for affecting stu-
dent behaviors other than the behavior of concern; and
(2) situations in which an intervention, estimated to be
effective if the target behavior were viewed in isolation,
may be ineffective because other ecological variables
come into play. Regardless of the amount and range of
information available concerning the student, a teacher
must still make instructional decisions based on an em-
pirical analysis of the target behavior. Ultimately, this
careful analysis (i.e., direct and daily measurement) of
the behavior of interest may be ineffective because other
ecological variables come into play. (p. 231)
Reactive Effects
of Direct Assessment
Reactivity refers to the effects of an assessment proce-
dure on the behavior being assessed (Kazdin, 1979). Re-
activity is most likely when observation is obtrusive-that
is, the person being observed is aware of the observer's
presence and purpose (Kazdin, 2001). Numerous stud-
ies have demonstrated that the presence of observers in
applied settings can influence a subject's behavior (Mer-
catoris & Craighead, 1974; Surratt, Ulrich, & Hawkins,
1969; White, 1977). Perhaps the most obtrusive assess-
ment procedures are those that require the subject to mon-
itor and record her own behavior. Research on
self-monitoring shows that the procedure commonly af-
fects the behavior under assessment (Kirby, Fowler, &
Baer, 1991).5
Although research suggests that even when the pres-
ence of an observer alters the behavior of the people being
observed, the reactive effects are usually temporary (e.g.,
Haynes & Horn, 1982; Kazdin, 1982). Nevertheless, be-
havior analysts should use assessment methods that are
as unobtrusive as possible, repeat observations until ap-
parent reactive effects subside, and take possible reactive
effects into account when interpreting the results of ob-
servations.

Assessing the Social
Significance of Potential
Target Behaviors
In the past, when a teacher, therapist, or other human ser-
vices professional determined that a client's behavior
should be changed, few questions were asked. It was as-
sumed that the change would be beneficial to the person.
This presumption of benevolence is no longer ethically
acceptable (not that it ever was). Because behavior ana-
lysts possess an effective technology to change behavior
in predetermined directions, accountability must be
served. Both the goals and the rationale supporting
behavior change programs must be open to critical ex-
amination by the consumers (clients and their families)
and by others who may be affected (society) by the be-
havior analyst's work. In selecting target behaviors, prac-
titioners should consider whose behavior is being
assessed—and changed—and why.
Target behaviors should not be selected for the pri-
mary benefit of others (e.g., "Be still, be quiet, be docile,"
in Winett & Winkler, 1972), to simply maintain the sta-
tus quo (Budd & Baer, 1976; Holland, 1978), or because
they pique the interest of someone in a position to change
the behaviors, as illustrated in the following incident:
A bright, conscientious graduate student was interested
in doing his thesis in a program for seriously malad-
justed children. He wanted to teach cursive writing to
a ... child [who] could not read (except his name), print,
or even reliably identify all the letters of the alphabet. I
asked "Who decided that was the problem to work on
next?" (Hawkins, 1975, p. 195)
Judgments about which behaviors to change are dif-
ficult to make. Still, practitioners are not without direc-
tion when choosing target behaviors. Numerous authors
have suggested guidelines and criteria for selecting tar-
get behaviors (e.g., Ayllon & Azrin, 1968; Bailey &
Lessen, 1984; Bosch & Fuqua, 2001; Hawkins, 1984;
Komaki, 1998; Rosales-Ruiz & Baer, 1997), all of which
revolve around the central question, To what extent will
the proposed behavior change improve the person's life
experience?
A Definition of Habilitation
Hawkins (1984) suggested that the potential meaning-
fulness of any behavior change should be judged within
the context of habilitation, which he defined as follows:
Habilitation (adjustment) is the degree to which the per-
son's repertoire maximizes short and long term rein-
forcers for that individual and for others, and minimizes
short and long term punishers. (p. 284)
Hawkins (1986) cited several advantages of the de-
finition in that it (a) is conceptually familiar to behavior
analysts, (b) defines treatment using measurable out-
comes, (c) is applicable to a wide range of habilitative
activities, (d) deals with individual and societal needs in
a nonjudgmental way, (e) treats adjustment along a con-
tinuum of adaptive behavior and is not deficit driven, and
(f) is culturally and situationally relative.
Judgments about how much a particular behavior
change will contribute to a person's overall habilitation
(adjustment, competence) are difficult to make. In many
cases we simply do not know how useful or functional a
given behavior change will prove to be (Baer, 1981, 1982),
even when its short-term utility can be predicted. Applied
behavior analysts, however, must place the highest im-
portance on the selection of target behaviors that are truly
useful and habilitative (Hawkins, 1991). In effect, if a po-
tential target behavior meets the habilitation standard, then
the individual is much more likely to acquire additional re-
inforcement in the future and avoid punishment.
From both ethical and pragmatic perspectives, any
behavior targeted for change must benefit the person ei-
ther directly or indirectly. Examining potential target be-
haviors according to the 10 questions and considerations
described in the following sections should help clarify
their relative social significance and habilitative value.
Figure 4 summarizes these considerations in a work-
sheet format that can be used in evaluating the social sig-
nificance of potential target behaviors.
Is This Behavior Likely to Produce
Reinforcement in the Client's
Natural Environment After
Treatment Ends?
To determine whether a particular target behavior is func-
tional for the client, the behavior analyst, significant oth-
ers, and whenever possible the client should ask whether
the proposed behavior change will be reinforced in the
person's daily life. Ayllon and Azrin (1968) called this
the relevance of behavior rule; it means that a target be-
havior should be selected only when it can be determined
that the behavior is likely to produce reinforcement in
the person's natural environment. The likelihood that a
new behavior will result in reinforcement after the be-
havior change program is terminated is the primary
determinant of whether the new behavior will be main-
tained, thereby having the possibility of long-term ben-
efits for that person.
Judging whether occurrences of the target behavior
will be reinforced in the absence of intervention can also
help to clarify whether the proposed behavior change is
primarily for the individual's benefit or for someone else.
For instance, despite parental wishes or pressure, it would
be of little value to try to teach math skills to a student
with severe developmental disabilities with pervasive
deficits in communication and social skills. Teaching
communication skills that would enable the student to
have more effective interactions in her current environ-
ment should take precedence over skills that she might be
able to use in the future (e.g., making change in the gro-
cery store). Sometimes target behaviors are selected ap-
propriately not because of their direct benefit to the
person, but because of an important indirect benefit. In-
direct benefits can occur in several different ways as de-
scribed by the three questions that follow.
Is This Behavior a Necessary
Prerequisite for a Useful Skill?
Some behaviors that, in and of themselves, are not im-
portant are targeted for instruction because they are nec-
essary prerequisites to learning other functional
behaviors. For example, advances in reading research
have demonstrated that teaching phonemic awareness
skills (e.g., sound isolation: What is the first sound in
nose?; phoneme segmentation: What sounds do you hear
in the word fat?; odd word out: What word starts with a
different sound: cat, couch, fine, cake?) to nonreaders
has positive effects on their acquisition of reading skills
(National Reading Panel, 2000).®
Will This Behavior Increase the
Client's Access to Environments in
Which Other Important Behaviors
Can Be Learned and Used?
Hawkins (1986) described the targeting of "access be-
haviors" as a means of producing indirect benefits to
clients. For example, special education students are some-
times taught to complete their workbook pages neatly,
interact politely with the general education classroom
teacher, and stay in their seats during the teacher's pre-
sentation. These behaviors are taught with the expectation
that they will increase acceptance into a general educa-
tion classroom, thereby increasing access to general ed-
ucation and instructional programs.
Will Changing This Behavior
Predispose Others to Interact with
the Client in a More Appropriate
and Supportive Manner?
Another type of indirect benefit occurs when a behavior
change is of primary interest to a significant other in the
person's life. The behavior change may enable the sig-
nificant other to behave in a manner more beneficial to the
person. For example, suppose a teacher wants the par-
ents of his students to implement a home-based instruc-
tion program, believing that the students' language skills
would improve considerably if their parents spent just 10
minutes per night playing a vocabulary game with them.
In meeting with one student's parents, however, the
teacher realizes that although the parents are also con-
cerned about poor language skills, they have other and,
in their opinion, more pressing needs—the parents want
their child to clean her room and help with the dinner
dishes. Even though the teacher believes that straighten-
ing up a bedroom and washing dishes are not as important
to the child's ultimate welfare as language development,
these tasks may indeed be important target behaviors if
a sloppy room and a sink full of dirty dishes impede pos-
itive parent-child interactions (including playing the
teacher's vocabulary-building games). In this case, the
daily chores might be selected as the target behaviors for
the direct, immediate benefit of the parents, with the
expectation that the parents will be more likely to help
their daughter with school-related activities if they are
happier with her because she straightens her bedroom
and helps with the dishes.

Is This Behavior a Behavioral Cusp
or a Pivotal Behavior?
Behavior analysts often use a building block method to
develop repertoires for clients. For example, in teaching
a complex skill (e.g., two-digit multiplication), simpler
and more easily attainable skills are taught first (e.g., ad-
dition, regrouping, single-digit multiplication), or with
shoe tying, crossing laces, making bows, and tying knots
are taught systematically. As skill elements are mastered,
they are linked (i.e., chained) into increasingly complex
repertoires. At any point along this developmental skill
continuum when the person performs the skill to crite-
rion, reinforcement follows, and the practitioner makes
the determination to advance to the next skill level. As
systematic and methodical as this approach has proven to
be, analysts are researching ways to improve the effi-
ciency of developing new behavior. Choosing target be-
haviors that are behavioral cusps and pivotal behaviors
may increase this efficiency.
Behavioral Cusps.
Rosales-Ruiz and Baer (1997) defined a behavioral cusp
as:
a behavior that has consequences beyond the change it-
self, some of which may be considered important....
What makes a behavior change a cusp is that it exposes
the individual's repertoire to new environments, espe-
cially new reinforcers and punishers, new contingen-
cies, new responses, new stimulus controls, and new
communities of maintaining or destructive contingen-
cies. When some or all of those events happen, the
individual's repertoire expands; it encounters a differen-
tially selective maintenance of the new as well as some
old repertoires, and perhaps that leads to some further
cusps. (p. 534)
Rosales-Ruiz and Baer (1997) cited as examples of
possible behavioral cusps behaviors such as crawling,
reading, and generalized imitation, because they "suddenly
open the child's world to new contingencies that will de-
velop many new, important behaviors" (p. 535, emphasis
added). Cusps differ from component or prerequisite be-
haviors. For an infant, specific arm, head, leg, or posi-
tional movements would be component behaviors for
crawling, but crawling is the cusp because it enables the
infant to contact new environments and stimuli as sources
of motivation and reinforcement (e.g., toys, parents),
which in turn opens a new world of contingencies that can
further shape and select other adaptive behaviors.
The importance of cusps is judged by (a) the extent of
the behavior changes they systematically enable, (b)
whether they systematically expose behavior to new
cusps, and (c) the audience's view of whether these
changes are important for the organism, which in turn is
often controlled by societal norms and expectations of
what behaviors should develop in children and when
that development should happen. (Rosales-Ruiz & Baer,
1997, p. 537)
Bosch and Fuqua (2001) suggested that clarifying "a
priori dimensions for determining if a behavior might be
a cusp is an important step in realizing the potential of the
cusp concept (p. 125). They stated that a behavior might
be a cusp if it meets one or more of five criteria: "(a) ac-
cess to new reinforcers, contingencies, and environments;
(b) social validity; (c) generativeness; (d) competition
with inappropriate responses; and (e) number and the rel-
ative importance of people affected" (p. 123). The more
criteria that a behavior satisfies, the stronger the case that
the behavior is a cusp. By identifying and assessing tar-
get behaviors based on their cusp value, practitioners may
indeed open "a new world" of far-reaching potential for
those they serve.

Pivotal Behavior
Pivotal behavior has emerged as an interesting and
promising concept in behavioral research, especially as
it relates to the treatment of people with autism and de-
velopmental disabilities. R. L. Koegel and L. K. Koegel
and their colleagues have examined pivotal behavior as-
sessment and treatment approaches across a wide range
of areas (e.g., social skills, communication ability, dis-
ruptive behaviors) (Koegel & Frea, 1993; Koegel &
Koegel, 1988; Koegel, Koegel, & Schreibman, 1991).
Briefly stated, a pivotal behavior is a behavior that, once
learned, produces corresponding modifications or co-
variations in other adaptive untrained behaviors. For in-
stance, Koegel, Carter, and Koegel (2003) indicated that
teaching children with autism to "self-initiate" (e.g., ap-
proach others) may be a pivotal behavior. The "longitu-
dinal outcome data from children with autism suggest
that the presence of initiations may be a prognostic in-
dicator of more favorable long-term outcomes and there-
fore may be 'pivotal' in that they appear to result in
widespread positive changes in a number of areas"
(p. 134). That is, improvement in self-initiations may be
pivotal for the emergence of untrained response classes,
such as asking questions and increased production and
diversity of talking.
Assessing and targeting pivotal behaviors can be ad-
vantageous for both the practitioner and the client. From
the practitioner's perspective, it might be possible to as-
sess and then train pivotal behaviors within relatively few
sessions that would later be emitted in untrained settings
or across untrained responses (Koegel et al., 2003). From
the client's perspective, learning a pivotal behavior would
shorten intervention, provide the person with a new reper-
toire with which to interact with his environment, im-
prove the efficiency of learning, and increase the chances
of coming into contact with reinforcers. As Koegel and
colleagues concluded: "The use of procedures that teach
the child with disabilities to evoke language learning op-
portunities in the natural environment may be particu-
larly useful for speech and language specialists or other
special educators who desire ongoing learning outside of
language teaching sessions" (p. 143).
Is This an Age-Appropriate Behavior?
A number of years ago it was common to see adults with
developmental disabilities being taught behaviors that
a nondisabled adult would seldom, if ever, do. It was
thought— perhaps as a by-product of the concept of men-
tal age-that a 35-year-old woman with the verbal skills
of a 10-year-old should play with dolls. Not only is the
selection of such target behaviors demeaning, but their
occurrence lessens the probability that other people in
the person's environment will set the occasion for and
reinforce more desirable, adaptive behaviors, which could
lead to a more normal and rewarding life.
The principle of normalization refers to the use of
progressively more typical environments, expectations,
and procedures "to establish and/or maintain personal
behaviors which are as culturally normal as possible"
(Wolfensberger, 1972, p. 28). Normalization is not a sin-
gle technique, but a philosophical position that holds the
goal of achieving the greatest possible physical and so-
cial integration of people with disabilities into the main-
stream of society.
In addition to the philosophical and ethical reasons
for selecting age- and setting-appropriate target behav-
iors, it should be reemphasized that adaptive, indepen-
dent, and social behaviors that come into contact with
reinforcement are more likely to be maintained than are
behaviors that do not. For example, instruction in leisure-
time skills such as sports, hobbies, and music-related ac-
tivities would be more functional for a 17-year-old boy
than teaching him to play with toy trucks and building
blocks. An adolescent with those behaviors even in an
adapted way— has a better chance of interacting in a typ-
ical fashion with his peer group, which may help to ensure
the maintenance of his newly learned skills and provide
opportunities for learning other adaptive behaviors.
If the Proposed Target Behavior Is
to Be Reduced or Eliminated, What
Adaptive Behavior Will Replace It?
A practitioner should never plan to reduce or eliminate a
behavior from a person's repertoire without (a) determin-
ing an adaptive behavior that will take its place and (b)
designing the intervention plan to ensure that the replace-
ment behavior is learned. Teachers and other human ser-
vices professionals should be in the business of building
positive, adaptive repertoires, not merely reacting to and
eliminating behaviors they find troublesome (Snell &
Brown, 2006). Even though a child's maladaptive behav-
iors may be exceedingly annoying to others, or even dam-
aging physically, those undesirable responses have proven
functional for the child. That is, the maladaptive behavior
has worked for the child in the past by producing rein-
forcers and/or helping the child avoid or escape punishers.
A program that only denies that avenue of reinforcement
is a nonconstructive approach. It does not teach adaptive
behaviors to replace the inappropriate behavior.
Some of the most effective and recommended meth-
ods for eliminating unwanted behavior focus primarily
on the development of desirable replacement behaviors.
Goldiamond (1974) recommended that a "constructional"
approach—as opposed to an eliminative approach-be
used for the analysis of and intervention into behavioral
problems. Under the constructional approach the "solu-
tion to problems is the construction of repertoires (or their
reinstatement or transfer to new situations) rather than
the elimination of repertoires" (Goldiamond, 1974, p. 14).
If a strong case cannot be made for specific, positive
replacement behaviors, then a compelling case has not
been made for eliminating the undesirable target behav-
ior. The classroom teacher, for example, who wants a be-
havior change program to maintain students staying in
their seats during reading period must go beyond the sim-
ple notion that "they need to be in their seats to do the
work." The teacher must select materials and design con-
tingencies that facilitate that goal and motivate the stu-
dents to accomplish their work.
Does This Behavior Represent
the Actual Problem or Goal,
or Is It Only Indirectly Related?
An all-too-common error in education is teaching a re-
lated behavior rather than the behavior of interest. Many
behavior change programs have been designed to increase
on-task behaviors when the primary objective should have
been to increase production or work output. On-task be-
haviors are chosen because people who are productive
also tend to be on task. However, as on task is usually
defined, it is quite possible for a student to be on task
(i.e., in her seat, quiet, and oriented toward or handling
academic materials) yet produce little or no work.
Targeting needed prerequisite skills should not be
confused with selecting target behaviors that do not di-
rectly represent or fulfill the primary reasons for the be-
havior analysis effort. Prerequisite skills are not taught
as terminal behaviors for their own sake, but as neces-
sary elements of the desired terminal behavior. Related,
but indirect, behaviors are not necessary to perform the
true objective of the program, nor are they really intended
outcomes of the program by themselves. In attempting
to detect indirectness, behavior analysts should ask two
questions: Is this behavior a necessary prerequisite to the
intended terminal behavior? Is this behavior what the in-
structional program is really all about? If either question
can be answered affirmatively, the behavior is eligible
for target behavior status.
Is This Just Talk, or Is It the Real
Behavior of Interest?
Many nonbehavioral therapies rely heavily on what peo-
ple say about what they do and why they do it. The
client's verbal behavior is considered important because
it is believed to reflect the client's inner state and the
mental processes that govern the client's behavior. There-
fore, getting a person to talk differently about himself
(e.g., in a more healthful, positive, and less self-effacing
way) is viewed as a significant step in solving the per-
son's problem. Indeed, this change in attitude is consid-
ered by some to be the primary goal of therapy.
Behavior analysts, on the other hand, distinguish be-
tween what people say and what they do (Skinner, 1953).
Knowing and doing are not the same. Getting someone
to understand his maladaptive behavior by being able to
talk logically about it does not necessarily mean that his
behavior will change in more constructive directions. The
gambler may know that compulsive betting is ruining his
life and that his losses would cease if he simply stopped
placing bets. He may even be able to verbalize these facts
to a therapist and state quite convincingly that he will not
gamble in the future. Still, he may continue to bet.
Because verbal behavior can be descriptive of what
people do, it is sometimes confused with the performance
itself. A teacher at a school for juvenile offenders intro-
duced a new math program that included instructional
games, group drills, timed tests, and self-graphing. The
students responded with many negative comments: "This
is stupid," "Man, I'm not writin' down what I do." "I'm
not even going to try on these tests." If the teacher had at-
tended only to the students' talk about the program, it
would probably have been discarded on the first day. But
the teacher was aware that negative comments about
school and work were expected in the peer group of ado-
lescent delinquents and that many of her students' nega-
tive remarks had enabled them in the past to avoid tasks
they thought they would not enjoy. Consequently, the
teacher ignored the negative comments and attended to
and rewarded her students for accuracy and rate of math
computation when they participated in the program. In
one week's time the negative talk had virtually ceased,
and the students' math production was at an all-time high.
There are, of course, situations in which the behav-
ior of interest is what the client says. Helping a person re-
duce the number of self-effacing comments he makes and
increase the frequency of positive self-descriptions is an
example of a program in which talk should be the target
behavior-not because the self-effacing comments are
indicative of a poor self-concept, but because the client's
verbal behavior is the problem.
In every case, a determination must be made of ex-
actly which behavior is the desired functional outcome of
the program: Is it a skill or motor performance, or is it
verbal behavior? In some instances, doing and talking
behaviors might be important. A trainee applying for a
lawn mower repair position may be more likely to get a
job if he can describe verbally how he would fix a cranky
starter on a mower. However, it is possible that, once
hired, he can hold his job if he is skilled and efficient in
repairing lawn mowers and does not talk about what he
does. However, it is highly unlikely that a person will last
very long on the job if he talks about how he would fix a
lawn mower but is not able to do so. Target behaviors
must be functional.
What If the Goal of the Behavior
Change Program Is Not a Behavior?
Some of the important changes people want to make in
their lives are not behaviors, but are instead the result or
product of certain other behaviors. Weight loss is an ex-
ample. On the surface it might appear that target behav-
ior selection is obvious and straightforward-losing
weight. The number of pounds can be measured accu-
rately; but weight, or more precisely losing weight, is not
a behavior. Losing weight is not a specific response that
can be defined and performed; it is the product or result
of other behaviors-most notably reduced food con-
sumption and/or increased exercise. Eating and exercise
are behaviors and can be specifically defined and mea-
sured in precise units.
Some otherwise well-designed weight loss programs
have not been successful because behavior change con-
tingencies were placed on the goal (reduced weight) and
not on the behaviors necessary to produce the goal. Tar-
get behaviors in a weight loss program should be mea-
sures of food consumption and exercise level, with
intervention strategies designed to address those behav-
iors (e.g., De Luca & Holborn, 1992; McGuire, Wing.
Klem, & Hill, 1999). Weight should be measured and
charted during a weight loss program, not because it is the
target behavior of interest, but because weight loss shows
the positive effects of increased exercise or decreased
food consumption.
There are numerous other examples of important
goals that are not behaviors, but are the end products of
behavior. Earning good grades, for example, is a goal
that must be analyzed to determine what behaviors pro-
duce better grades (e.g., solving math problems via
guided and independent practice). Behavior analysts can
better help clients achieve their goals by selecting target
behaviors that are the most directly and functionally re-
lated to those goals.
Some goals expressed by and for clients are not the di-
rect product of a specific target behavior, but broader, more
general goals: to be more successful, to have more friends,
to be creative, to learn good sportsmanship, to develop an
improved self-concept. Clearly, none of these goals are de-
fined by specific behaviors, and all are more complex in
terms of their behavioral components than losing weight or
getting a better grade in math. Goals such as being suc-
cessful represent a class of related behaviors or a general
pattern of responding. They are labels that are used to de-
scribe people who behave in certain ways. Selecting target
behaviors that will help clients or students attain these kinds
of goals is even more difficult than their complexity sug-
gests because the goals themselves often mean different
things to different people. Being a success can entail a wide
variety of behaviors. One person may view success in terms
of income and job title. For another, success might mean
job satisfaction and good use of leisure time. An important
role of the behavior analyst during assessment and target
behavior identification is to help the client select and de-
fine personal behaviors, the sum of which will result in the
client and others evaluating her repertoire in the intended
fashion.
Prioritizing Target
Behaviors
Once a "pool" of eligible target behaviors has been iden-
tified, decisions must be made about their relative prior-
ity. Sometimes the information obtained from behavioral
assessment points to one particular aspect of the person's
repertoire in need of improvement more so than another.
More often, though, assessment reveals a constellation
of related, and sometimes not-so-related, behaviors in
need of change. Direct observations, along with a be-
havioral interview and needs assessment, may produce a
long list of important behaviors to change. When more
than one eligible target behavior remains after careful
evaluation of the considerations described in the previous
section, the question becomes, Which behavior should
be changed first? Judging each potential target behavior
in light of the following nine questions may help deter-
mine which behavior deserves attention first, and the rel-
ative order in which the remaining behaviors will be
addressed.
1. Does this behavior pose any danger to the client or to
others? Behaviors that cause harm or pose a serious
threat to the client's or to others' personal safety or
health must receive first priority.
2. How many opportunities will the person have to
use this new behavior? or How often does this
problem behavior occur? A student who consis-
tently writes reversed letters presents more of a
problem than does a child who reverses letters
only occasionally. If the choice is between first
teaching a prevocational student to pack his lunch
or to learn how to plan his two-week vacation
each year, the former skill takes precedence be-
cause the employee-to-be may need to pack his
lunch every workday.
3. How long-standing is the problem or skill deficit?
A chronic behavior problem (e.g., bullying) or skill
deficit (e.g., lack of social interaction skills) should
take precedence over problems that appear sporadi-
cally or that have just recently surfaced.
4. Will changing this behavior produce higher rates
of reinforcement for the person? If all other con-
siderations are equal, a behavior that results in
higher, sustained levels of reinforcement should
take precedence over a behavior that produces little
additional reinforcement for the client.
5. What will be the relative importance of this target
behavior to future skill development and indepen-
dent functioning? Each target behavior should be
judged in terms of its relation (i.e., prerequisite or
supportive) to other critical behaviors needed for
optimal learning and development and maximum
levels of independent functioning in the future.
6. Will changing this behavior reduce negative or un-
wanted attention from others? Some behaviors are
not maladaptive because of anything inherent in
the behavior itself, but because of the unnecessary
problems the behavior causes the client. Some peo-
ple with developmental and motoric disabilities
may have difficulty at mealtimes with using uten-
sils and napkins appropriately, thus reducing op-
portunities for positive interaction in public.
Granted, public education and awareness are war-
ranted as well, but it would be naive not to con-
sider the negative effects of public reaction. Also,
not teaching more appropriate mealtime skills may
be a disservice to the person. Idiosyncratic public
displays or mannerisms may be high-priority target
behaviors if their modification is likely to provide
access to more normalized settings or important
learning environments.
7. Will this new behavior produce reinforcement for
significant others? Even though a person's behav-
ior should seldom, if ever, be changed simply for
the convenience of others or for maintenance of the
status quo, neither should the effect of a person's
behavior change on the significant others in his life
be overlooked. This question is usually answered
best by the significant others themselves because
people not directly involved in the person's life
would often have
no idea how rewarding it is to see your retarded 19
year old acquire the skill of toilet flushing on com-
mand or pointing to food when she wants a second
helping. I suspect that the average taxpayer would
not consider it "meaningful" to him or her for Kar-
rie to acquire such skills. And, although we cannot
readily say how much Karrie's being able to flush
the toilet enhances her personal reinforcement/pun-
ishment ratio, I can testify that it enhances mine as
a parent. (Hawkins, 1984, p. 285)
8. How likely is success in changing this target be-
havior? Some behaviors are more difficult to
change than others. At least three sources of infor-
mation can help assess the level of difficulty or,
more precisely, predict the ease or degree of suc-
cess in changing a particular behavior. First, what
does the literature say about attempts to change
this behavior? Many of the target behaviors that
confront applied behavior analysts have been stud-
ied. Practitioners should stay abreast of published
research reports in their areas of application. Not
only is such knowledge likely to improve the selec-
tion of proven and efficient techniques for behavior
change, but also it may help to predict the level of
difficulty or chance of success.
Second, how experienced is the practitioner?
The practitioner's own competencies and experi-
ences with the target behavior in question should
be considered. A teacher who has worked success-
fully for many years with acting-out, aggressive
children may have an array of effective behavior
management strategies ready to employ and might
predict success with even the most challenging
child. However, that same teacher might decide
that he is less able to improve a student's written
language skills.
Third, to what extent can important variables
in the client's environment be controlled effec-
tively? Whether a certain behavior can be changed
is not the question. In an applied setting, however,
identifying and then consistently manipulating the
controlling variables for a given target behavior
will determine whether the behavior will be
changed.
Fourth, are the resources available to imple-
ment and maintain the intervention at a level of fi-
delity and intensity long enough that is likely to
achieve the desired outcomes? No matter how ex-
pertly designed a treatment plan, implementing it
without the personnel and other resources needed
to carry out the intervention properly is likely to
yield disappointing results.
9. How much will it cost to change this behavior? Cost
should be considered before implementing any sys-
tematic behavior change program. However, a
cost-benefit analysis of several potential target be-
haviors does not mean that if a teaching program is
expensive, it should not be implemented. Major
courts have ruled that the lack of public funds may
not be used as an excuse for not providing an appro-
priate education to all children regardless of the
severity of their disability (cf., Yell & Drasgow,
2000). The cost of a behavior change program cannot
be determined by simply adding dollar amounts that
might be expended on equipment, materials, trans-
portation, staff salaries, and the like. Consideration
should also be given to how much of the client's time
the behavior change program will demand. If, for ex-
ample, teaching a fine motor skill to a child with se-
vere disabilities would consume so much of the
child's day that there would be little time remaining
for her to learn other important behaviors-such as
communication, leisure, and self-help skills—or sim-
ply to have some free time, the fine motor skill objec-
tive may be too costly.
Developing and Using a Target
Behavior Ranking Matrix
Assigning a numerical rating to each of a list of potential
target behaviors can produce a priority ranking of those
behaviors. One such ranking matrix is shown in Figure
5; it is an adaptation of a system described by Dardig
and Heward (1981) for prioritizing and selecting learning
goals for students with disabilities. Each behavior is given
a number representing the behavior's value on each of
the prioritizing variables (e.g., 0 to 4 with 0 representing
no value or contribution and 4 representing maximum
value or benefit).
Professionals involved in planning behavior change
programs for certain student or client populations will
usually want to weigh some of the variables differentially,
require a maximum rating on certain selection variables,
and/or add other variables that are of particular impor-
tance to their overall goals. For example, professionals
planning behavior change programs for senior citizens
would probably insist that target behaviors with imme-
diate benefits receive high priority. Educators serving
secondary students with disabilities would likely advocate
for factors such as the relative importance of a target
behavior for future skill development and independent
functioning.
Sometimes the behavior analyst, the client, and/or
significant others have conflicting goals. Parents may
want their teenage daughter in the house by 10:30 P.M.
on weekends, but the daughter may want to stay out later.
The school may want a behavior analyst to develop a pro-
gram to increase students' adherence to dress and social
codes. The behavior analyst may believe that these codes
are outdated and are not in the purview of the school.
Who decides what is best for whom?
One way to minimize and work through conflicts is
to obtain client, parent, and staff/administration partici-
pation in the goal determination process. For example,
the active participation of parents and, when possible, the
student in the selection of short- and long-term goals and
treatment procedures is required by law in planning spe-
cial education services for students with disabilities (In-
dividuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act of
2004). Such participation by all of the significant parties
can avoid and resolve goal conflicts, not to mention the
invaluable information the participants can provide rela-
tive to other aspects of program planning (e.g., identifi-
cation of likely reinforcers). Reviewing the results of
assessment efforts and allowing each participant to pro-
vide input on the relative merits of each proposed goal or
target behavior can often produce consensus on the best
direction. Program planners should not commit a priori
that whatever behavior is ranked first will necessarily be
considered the highest priority target behavior. However,
if the important people involved in a person's life go
through a ranking process such as the one shown in
Figure 5, they are likely to identify areas of agreement
and disagreement, which can lead to further discussions
of target behavior selection and concentration on the crit-
ical concerns of those involved.

Defining Target Behaviors
Before a behavior can undergo analysis, it must be de-
fined in a clear, objective, and concise manner. In con-
structing target behavior definitions, applied behavior
analysts must consider the functional and topographical
implications of their definitions.
Role and Importance of Target
Behavior Definitions in Applied
Behavior Analysis
Applied behavior analysis derives its validity from its
systematic approach to seeking and organizing knowl-
edge about human behavior. Validity of scientific knowl-
edge in its most basic form implies replication. When
predicted behavioral effects can be reproduced, princi-
ples of behavior are confirmed and methods of practice
developed. If applied behavior analysts employ defini-
tions of behavior not available to other scientists, repli-
cation is less likely. Without replication, the usefulness or
meaningfulness of data cannot be determined beyond the
specific participants themselves, thereby limiting the or-
derly development of the discipline as a useful technol-
ogy (Baer, Wolf, & Risley, 1968). Without explicit
well-written definitions of target behaviors, researchers
would be unable to accurately and reliably measure the
same response classes within and across studies; or to
aggregate, compare, and interpret their data.?
Explicit, well-written definitions of target behavior
are also necessary for the practitioner, who may not be so
concerned with replication by others or development of
the field. Most behavior analysis programs are not con-
ducted primarily for the advancement of the field; they are
implemented by educators, clinicians, and other human
services professionals to improve the lives of their clients.
However, implicit in the application of behavior analysis
is an accurate, ongoing evaluation of the target behavior,
for which an explicit definition of behavior is a must.
A practitioner concerned only with evaluating his ef-
forts in order to provide optimum service to his clients,
might ask, "As long as I know what I mean by [name of
target behavior], why must I write down a specific defi-
nition?" First, a good behavioral definition is operational.
It provides the opportunity to obtain complete informa-
tion about the behavior's occurrence and nonoccurrence,
and it enables the practitioner to apply procedures in a
consistently accurate and timely fashion. Second, a good
definition increases the likelihood of an accurate and be-
lievable evaluation of the program's effectiveness. Not
only does an evaluation need to be accurate to guide on-
going program decisions, but also the data must be be-
lievable to those with a vested interest in the program's
effectiveness. Thus, even though the practitioner may not
be interested in demonstrating an analysis to the field at
large, she must always be concerned with demonstrating
effectiveness (i.e., accountability) to clients, parents, and
administrators.

Two Types of Target
Behavior Definitions
Target behaviors can be defined functionally or topo-
graphically.
Function-Based Definitions
A function-based definition designates responses as
members of the targeted response class solely by their
common effect on the environment. For example, Irvin,
Thompson, Turner, and Williams (1998) defined hand
mouthing as any behavior that resulted in "contact of the
fingers, hand, or wrist with the mouth, lips, or tongue (P.
377). Figure 6 shows several examples of function-
based definitions.
Applied behavior analysts should use function-based
definitions of target behaviors whenever possible for the
following reasons:
• A function-based definition encompasses all rele-
vant forms of the response class. However, target
behavior definitions based on a list of specific
topographies might omit some relevant members
of the response class and/or include irrelevant re-
sponse topographies. For example, defining chil-
dren's offers to play with peers in terms of specific
things the children say and do might omit re-
sponses to which peers respond with reciprocal
play and/or include behaviors that peers reject.
• The outcome, or function, of behavior is most im-
portant. This holds true even for target behaviors
for which form or aesthetics is central to their
being valued as socially significant. For example,
the flowing strokes of the calligrapher's pen and
the gymnast's elegant movements during a floor
routine are important (i.e., have been selected) be-
cause of their effects or function on others (e.g.,
praise from the calligraphy teacher, high scores
from gymnastics judges).
• Functional definitions are often simpler and more
concise than topography-based definitions, which
leads to easier and more accurate and reliable mea-
surement and sets the occasion for the consistent
application of intervention. For example, in their
study on skill execution by college football play-
ers, Ward and Carnes (2002) recorded a correct
tackle according to the clear and simple definition,
"if the offensive ball carrier was stopped" (p. 3).
Function-based definitions can also be used in some
situations in which the behavior analyst does not have
direct and reliable access to the natural outcome of the
target behavior, or cannot use the natural outcome of the
target behavior for ethical or safety reasons. In such cases,
a function-based definition by proxy can be considered.
For example, the natural outcome of elopement (i.e., run-
ning or walking away from a caregiver without consent)
is a lost child. By defining elopement as "any movement
away from the therapist more than 1.5 m without per-
mission" (p. 240), Tarbox, Wallace, and Williams (2003)
were able to measure and treat this socially significant
target behavior in a safe and meaningful manner.
Figure 6 Function-based definitions of various target behaviors.
Creativity in Children's Blockbuilding
The child behaviors of blockbuilding were defined according to their products, block forms.
The researchers created a list of 20 arbitrary, but frequently seen forms, including:
Arch-any placement of a block atop two lower blocks not in contiguity.
Ramp—a block leaned against another, or a triangular block placed contiguous to
another, to simulate a ramp.
Story-two or more blocks placed one atop another, the upper block(s) resting
solely upon the lower.
Tower-any story of two or more blocks in which the lowest block is at least twice as
tall as it is wide. (Goetz & Baer, 1973, pp. 210-211).
Exercise by Obese Boys
Riding a stationary bicycle each wheel revolution constituted a response, which was
automatically recorded by magnetic counters (DeLuca & Holborn, 1992, p. 672).
Compliance at Stop Signs by Motorists
Coming to a complete stop-observers scored a vehicle as coming to a complete stop if
the tires stopped rolling prior to the vehicle entering the intersection (Van Houten &
Retting, 2001, p. 187).
Recycling by Office Employees
Recycling office paper-number of pounds and ounces of recyclable office paper found in
recycling and trash containers. All types of paper accepted as recyclable were identified as
well as examples of nonrecyclable paper (Brothers, Krantz, & McClannahan, 1994, p. 155).
Safety Skills to Prevent Gun Play by Children
Touching the firearm-the child making contact with the firearm with any part of his or her
body or with any object (e.g., a toy) resulting in the displacement of the firearm.
Leaving the area-the child removing himself or herself from the room in which the firearm
was located within 10 seconds of seeing the firearm (Himle, Miltenberger, Flessner, &
Gatheridge, 2004, p. 3).
Topography-Based Definitions
A topography-based definition identifies instances of
the target behavior by the shape or form of the behavior.
Topography-based definitions should be used when the
behavior analyst (a) does not have direct, reliable, or easy
access to the functional outcome of the target behavior,
and/or (b) cannot rely on the function of the behavior be-
cause each instance of the target behavior does not pro-
duce the relevant outcome in the natural environment or
the outcome might be produced by other events. For ex-
ample, Silvestri (2004) defined and measured two classes
of positive teacher statements according to the words that
made up the statements, not according to whether the
comments produced specific outcomes (see Figure 7).
Topography-based definitions can also be used for
target behaviors for which the relevant outcome is some-
times produced in the natural environment by undesir-
able variations of the response class. For example,
because a duffer's very poor swing of a golf club some-
times produces a good outcome (i.e., the ball lands on
the green), it is better to define a correct swing by the po-
sition and movement of the golf club and the golfer's feet,
hips, head, and hands.
A topography-based definition should encompass all
response forms that would typically produce the relevant
outcome in the natural environment. Although topogra-
phy provides an important element for defining target be-
haviors, the applied behavior analyst must be especially
careful not to select target behaviors solely on the basis
of topography (see Box 1).
Figure 7 Topography-based definitions for two types of teacher statements.
Generic Positive Statements
Generic positive statements were defined as audible statements by the teacher that
referred to one or more student's behavior or work products as desirable or commendable
(e.g., "I'm proud of you!", "Great job, everyone."). Statements made to other adults in the
room were recorded if they were loud enough to be heard by the students and made direct
reference to student behavior or work products (e.g., "Aren't you impressed at how quietly
my students are working today?"). A series of positive comments that specified neither
student names nor behaviors with less than 2 seconds between comments was recorded
as one statement. For example, if the teacher said, "Good, good, good. I'm so impressed"
when reviewing three or four students' work, it was recorded as one statement.
Teacher utterances not recorded as generic positive statements included (a)
statements that referred to specific behavior or student names, (b) neutral statements
indicating only that an academic response was correct (e.g., "Okay", "Correct"), (c) positive
statements not related to student behavior (e.g., saying "Thanks for dropping off my
attendance forms" to a colleague), and (d) incomprehensible or inaudible statements.
Behavior-Specific Positive Statements
Behavior-specific positive statements made explicit reference to an observable behavior
(e.g., "Thank you for putting your pencil away"). Specific positive statements could refer to
general classroom behavior (e.g., "You did a great job walking back to your seat quietly")
or academic performance (e.g., "That was a super smart answer!"). To be recorded as
separate responses, specific positive statements were separated from one another by 2
seconds or by differentiation of the behavior praised. In other words, if a teacher named a
desirable behavior and then listed multiple students who were demonstrating the behavior,
this would be recorded as one statement (e.g., "Marissa, Tony, and Mark, you did a great
job of returning your materials when you were finished with them"). However, a teacher's
positive comment noting several different behaviors would be recorded as multiple
statements regardless of the interval between the end of one comment and the start of the
next. For example, "Jade, you did a great job cleaning up so quickly; Charles, thanks for
putting the workbooks away; and class, I appreciate that you lined up quietly" would be
recorded as three positive statements.
Writing Target Behavior Definitions
A good definition of a target behavior provides an accu-
rate, complete, and concise description of the behavior
to be changed (and therefore measured). It also states
what is not included in the behavioral definition. Asking
to be excused from the dinner table is an observable and
measurable behavior that can be counted. By compari-
son, "exercising good manners" is not a description of
any particular behavior; it merely implies a general re-
sponse class of polite and socially acceptable behaviors.
Hawkins and Dobes (1977) described three characteris-
tics of a good definition:
1. The definition should be objective, referring only
to observable characteristics of the behavior (and
environment, if needed) or translating any inferen-
tial terms (such as "expressing hostile feelings,"
"intended to help," or "showing interest in") into
more objective ones.
2. The definition should be clear in that it should be
readable and unambiguous so that experienced
observers could read it and readily paraphrase it
accurately.
3. The definition should be complete, delineating the
"boundaries" of what is to be included as an in-
stance of the response and what is to be excluded,
thereby directing the observers in all situations that
are likely to occur and leaving little to their judg-
ment. (p. 169)
Stated succinctly, a good definition must be objec-
tive, assuring that specific instances of the defined target
behavior can be observed and recorded reliably. An ob-
jective definition increases the likelihood of an accurate
and believable evaluation of program effectiveness. Sec-
ond, a clear definition is technological, meaning that it en-
ables others to use and replicate it (Baer et al., 1968). A
clear definition therefore becomes operational for pre-
sent and future purposes. Finally, a complete definition
discriminates between what is and what is not an instance
of the target behavior. A complete definition allows oth-
ers to record an occurrence of a target behavior, but not
record instances of nonoccurrence, in a standard fashion.
A complete definition is a precise and concise description
of the behavior of interest. Note how the target behavior
definitions in Figures 6 and 7 meet the standard for
being objective, clear, and complete.
Morris (1985) suggested testing the definition of a
target behavior by asking three questions:
1. Can you count the number of times that the behav-
ior occurs in, for example, a 15-minute period, a
1-hour period, or one day? Or, can you count the
number of minutes that it takes for the child to per-
form the behavior? That is, can you tell someone
that the behavior occurred "x" number of times of
"x" number of minutes today? (Your answer
should be "yes.")
2. Will a stranger know exactly what to look for when
you tell him/her the target behavior you are plan-
ning to modify? That is, can you actually see the
child performing the behavior when it occurs?
(Your answer should be "yes.")
3. Can you break down the target behavior into
smaller behavioral components, each of which is
more specific and observable than the original tar-
get behavior? (Your answer should be "no.").
In responding to the suggestion that perhaps a
sourcebook of standard target behavior definitions be de-
veloped because it would increase the likelihood of exact
replications among applied researchers and would save
the considerable time spent in developing and testing
situation-specific definitions, Baer (1985) offered the fol-
lowing perspectives. Applied behavior analysis programs
are implemented because someone (e.g., teacher, parent,
individual himself) has "complained" that a behavior
needs to be changed. A behavioral definition has validity
in applied behavior analysis only if it enables observers
to capture every aspect of the behavior that the com-
plainer is concerned with and none other. Thus, to be
valid from an applied perspective, definitions of target
behaviors should be situation specific. Attempts to stan-
dardize behavior definitions assume an unlikely similar-
ity across all situations.
Box 1
How Serious Are These Behavior Problems?
Suppose you are a behavior analyst in a position to de-
sign and help implement an intervention to change the
following four behaviors:
1. A child repeatedly raises her arm, extending and
retracting her fingers toward her palm in a grip-
ping/releasing type of motion.
2. An adult with developmental disabilities pushes
his hand hard against his eye, making a fist and
rubbing his eye rapidly with his knuckles.
3. Several times each day a high school student
rhythmically drums her fingers up and down,
sometimes in bursts of 10 to 15 minutes in dura-
tion.
4. A person repeatedly grabs at and squeezes another
person's arms and legs so hard that the other per-
son winces and says "Ouch!"
How much of a problem does the behavior pose for
the person or for others who share his or her current and fu-
ture environments? Would you rate each behavior as a mild,
moderate, or serious problem? How important do you think
it would be to target each of these behaviors for reduction
or elimination from the repertoires of the four individuals?
Appropriate answers to these questions cannot be
found in topographical descriptions alone. The meaning
and relative importance of any operant behavior can be
determined only in the context of the environmental an-
tecedents and consequences that define the behavior.
Here is what each of the four people in the previous ex-
amples were actually doing:
1. An infant learning to wave "bye-bye."
2. A man with allergies rubbing his eye to relieve the
itching.
3. A student typing unpredictable text to increase her
keyboarding fluency and endurance.
4. A massage therapist giving a relaxing, deep-
muscle massage to a grateful and happy customer.
Applied behavior analysts must remember that the
meaning of any behavior is determined by its function,
not its form. Behaviors should not be targeted for change
on the basis of topography alone.
Setting Criteria for
Behavior Change
Target behaviors are selected for study in applied behav-
ior analysis because of their importance to the people in-
volved. Applied behavior analysts attempt to increase,
maintain, and generalize adaptive, desirable behaviors
and decrease the occurrence of maladaptive, undesirable
behaviors. Behavior analysis efforts that not only target
important behaviors but also change those behaviors to an
extent that a person's life is changed in a positive and
meaningful way, are said to have social validity.* But
how much does a target behavior need to change before
it makes a meaningful difference in the person's life?
Van Houten (1979) made a case for specifying the
desired outcome criteria before efforts to modify the tar-
get behavior begin.
This step [specifying outcome criteria] becomes as im-
portant as the previous step [selecting socially important
target behaviors] if one considers that for most behav-
iors there exists a range of responding within which per-
formance is most adaptive. When the limits of this range
are unknown for a particular behavior, it is possible that
one could terminate treatment when performance is
above or below these limits. Hence, the behavior would
not be occurring within its optimal range....
In order to know when to initiate and terminate a
treatment, practitioners require socially validated stan-
dards for which they can aim. (pp. 582, 583)
Van Houten (1979) suggested two basic approaches
to determining socially valid goals: (a) Assess the perfor-
mance of people judged to be highly competent, and (b)
experimentally manipulate different levels of performance
to determine empirically which produces optimal results.
Regardless of the method used, specifying treatment
goals before intervention begins provides a guideline for
continuing or terminating a treatment. Further, setting
objective, predetermined goals helps to eliminate dis-
agreements or biases among those involved in evaluat-
ing a program's effectiveness.
Summary
Role of Assessment in Behavior Analysis
1. Behavioral assessment involves a full range of inquiry meth-
ods including direct observations, interviews, checklists,
and tests to identify and define targets for behavior change.
2. Behavioral assessment can be conceptualized as funnel
shaped, with an initial broad scope leading to an eventual
narrow and constant focus.
3. Behavioral assessment consists of five phases or functions:
(a) screening, (b) defining and quantifying problems or
goals, (c) pinpointing the target behavior(s) to be treated
(d) monitoring progress, and (e) following up.
4. Before conducting a behavioral assessment, the behav-
ior analyst must determine whether he has the authority
and permission, resources, and skills to assess and change
the behavior.
Assessment Methods Used by Behavior Analysis
5. Four major methods for obtaining assessment information
are (a) interviews, (b) checklists, (c) tests, and (d) direct
observations.
6. The client interview is used to determine the client's de-
scription of problem behaviors or achievement goals.
What, when, and where questions are emphasized, focus-
ing on the actual behavior of the client and the responses
of significant others to that behavior.
7. Questionnaires and needs assessment surveys are some-
times completed by the client to supplement the informa-
tion gathered in the interview.
8. Clients are sometimes asked to self-monitor certain situ-
ations or behaviors. Self-collected data may be useful in
selecting and defining target behaviors.
9. Significant others can also be interviewed to gather assess-
ment information and, in some cases, to find out whether
they will be willing and able to assist in an intervention.
10. Direct observation with a behavior checklist that contains
specific descriptions of various skills can indicate possi-
ble target behaviors.
11. Anecdotal observation, also called ABC recording, yields
a descriptive, temporally sequenced account of all behav-
ior(s) of interest and the antecedent conditions and con-
sequences for those behaviors as those events occur in the
client's natural environment.
12. Ecological assessment entails gathering a large amount of
information about the person and the environments in
which that person lives and works (e.g., physiological con-
ditions, physical aspects of the environment, interactions
with others, past reinforcement history). A complete eco-
logical assessment is neither necessary nor warranted for
most applied behavior analysis programs.
13. Reactivity, the effects of an assessment procedure on the
behavior being assessed, is most likely when the person
being observed is aware of the observer's presence and
purpose. Behavior analysts should use assessment meth-
ods that are as unobtrusive as possible, repeat observations
until apparent reactive effects subside, and take possible re-
active effects into account when interpreting the results of
observations.
Assessing the Social Significance of Potential
Target Behaviors
14. Target behaviors in applied behavior analysis must be so-
cially significant behaviors that will increase a person's
habilitation (adjustment, competence).
15. The relative social significance and habilitative value of a
potential target behavior can be clarified by viewing it in
light of the following considerations:
• Will the behavior be reinforced in the person's daily
life? The relevance of behavior rule requires that a tar-
get behavior produce reinforcement for the person in
the postintervention environment.
• Is the behavior a necessary prerequisite for a useful skill?
• Will the behavior increase the person's access to envi-
ronments in which other important behaviors can be
learned or used?
• Will the behavior predispose others to interact with the
person in a more appropriate and supportive manner?
• Is the behavior a cusp or pivotal behavior? Behavioral
cusps have sudden and dramatic consequences that ex-
tend well beyond the idiosyncratic change itself be-
cause they expose the person to new environments,
reinforcers, contingencies, responses, and stimulus con-
trols. Learning a pivotal behavior produces corre-
sponding modifications or covariations in other
untrained behaviors.
• Is the behavior age appropriate?
• Whenever a behavior is targeted for reduction or elim-
ination, a desirable, adaptive behavior must be selected
to replace it.
• Does the behavior represent the actual problem or
achievement goal, or is it only indirectly related?
• A person's verbal behavior should not be confused with
the actual behavior of interest. However, in some situ-
ations the client's verbal behavior should be selected as
the target behavior because it is the behavior of interest.
• If a person's goal is not a specific behavior, a target be-
havior(s) must be selected that will produce the desired
results or state.
Prioritizing Target Behaviors
16. Assessment often reveals more than one possible behav-
ior or skill area for targeting. Prioritization can be ac-
complished by rating potential target behavior against key
questions related to their relative danger, frequency, long-
standing existence, potential for reinforcement, relevance
for future skill development and independent functioning,
reduced negative attention from others, likelihood of suc-
cess, and cost.
17. Participation by the person whose behavior is to be
changed I, parents and/or other important family members,
staff, and administration in identifying and prioritizing tar-
get behaviors can help reduce goal conflicts.
Defining Target Behaviors
18. Explicit, well-written target behavior definitions are nec-
essary for researchers to accurately and reliably measure
the same response classes within and across studies or to
aggregate, compare, and interpret their data.
19. Good target behaviors definitions are necessary for prac-
titioners to collect accurate and believable data to guide
ongoing program decisions, apply procedures consis-
tently, and provide accountability to clients, parents, and
administrators.
20. Function-based definitions designate responses as mem-
bers of the targeted response class solely by their common
effect on the environment.
21. Topography-based definitions define instances of the tar-
geted response class behavior by the shape or form of
the behavior.
22. A good definition must be objective, clear, and complete,
and must discriminate between what is and what is not an
instance of the target behavior.
23. A target behavior definition is valid if it enables observers
to capture every aspect of the behavior that the "com-
plainer" is concerned with and none other.
Setting Criteria for Behavior Change
24. A behavior change has social validity if it changes some
aspect of the person's life in an important way.
25. Outcome criteria specifying the extent of behavior change
desired or needed should be determined before efforts to
modify the target behavior begin.
26. Two approaches to determining socially validated perfor-
mance criteria are (a) assessing the performance of people
judged to be highly competent and (b) experimentally ma-
nipulating different levels of performance to determine
which produces optimal results.
Measuring Behavior
Key Terms
artifact frequency rate
celeration interresponse time (IRT) repeatability
celeration time period magnitude response latency
celeration trend line measurement temporal extent
count measurement by permanent product temporal locus
discrete trial momentary time sampling time sampling
duration partial-interval recording topography
event recording percentage trials-to-criterion
free operant planned activity check (PLACHECK) whole-interval recording
Behavior Analyst Certification Board" BCBA" & BCABA*
Behavior Analyst Task List®, Third Edition
Content Area 6: Measurement of Behavior
6-1 Identify the measurable dimensions of behavior (e.g., rate, duration, latency, or
interresponse times).
6-3
place theres an amping disaiaus 8 aial and whose inaur mond-
ing, momentary time sampling).
6-4 Select the appropriate measurement procedure given the dimensions of the
behavior and the logistics of observing and recording.
6-6 Use frequency (i.e, count).
6-7 Use rate (i.e., count per unit of time).
6-8 Use duration.
6-9 Use latency.
6-10 Use interresponse time (IRT).
6-11 Use percentage of occurrence.
6-12 Use trials-to-criterion.
6-13 Use interval recording methods.
Lord Kelvin, the British mathematician and
physicist, supposedly said, "Until you can ex-
press what you are talking about in numbers and
can measure it, your knowledge is meager and unsatis-
factory." Measurement (applying quantitative labels to
describe and differentiate natural events) provides the
basis for all scientific discoveries and for the develop-
ment and successful application of technologies derived
from those discoveries. Direct and frequent measurement
provides the foundation for applied behavior analysis.
Applied behavior analysts use measurement to detect and
compare the effects of various environmental arrange-
ments on the acquisition, maintenance, and generalization
of socially significant behaviors.
But what is it about behavior that applied behavior
analysts can and should measure? How should those
measures be obtained? And, what should we do with
these measures once we have obtained them? This chap-
ter identifies the dimensions by which behavior can be
measured and describes the methods behavior analysts
commonly use to measure them. But first, we examine
the definition and functions of measurement in applied
behavior analysis.
Definition and Functions
of Measurement in Applied
Behavior Analysis
Measurement is "the process of assigning numbers and
units to particular features of objects or events. ... [It] in-
volves attaching a number representing the observed ex-
tent of a dimensional quantity to an appropriate unit. The
number and the unit together constitute the measure of the
object or event" (Johnston & Pennypacker, 1993a, pp.
91, 95). A dimensional quantity is the particular feature
of an object or event that is measured. For example, a
single occurrence of a phenomenon-say, the response of
"c-a-t" to the question, "How do you spell cat?" —would
be assigned the number 1 and the unit label correct. Ob-
serving another instance of the same response class would
change the label to 2 correct. Other labels could also be
applied based on accepted nomenclature. For example,
if 8 of 10 observed responses met a standard definition of
"correct," accuracy of responding could be described with
the label, 80% correct. If the 8 correct responses were
emitted in 1 minute, a rate or frequency label of 8 per
minute would apply.
Bloom, Fischer, and Orme (2003)-who described
measurement as the act or process of applying quantita-
tive or qualitative labels to events, phenomena, or ob-
served properties using a standard set of consensus-based
rules by which to apply labels to those occurrences—
pointed out that the concept of measurement also includes
the characteristics of what is being measured, the quality
and appropriateness of the measurement tools, the tech-
nical skill of the measurer, and how the measures
obtained are used. In the end, measurement gives re-
searchers, practitioners, and consumers a common means
for describing and comparing behavior with a set of la-
bels that convey a common meaning.
Researchers Need Measurement
Measurement is how scientists operationalize empiri-
cism. Objective measurement enables (indeed, it re-
quires) scientists to describe the phenomena they observe
in precise, consistent, and publicly verifiable ways. With-
out measurement, all three levels of scientific knowl-
edge— description, prediction, and control—would be
relegated to guesswork subject to the "individual preju-
dices, tastes, and private opinions of the scientist"
(Zuriff, 1985, p. 9). We would live in a world in which
the alchemist's suppositions about a life-prolonging
elixir would prevail over the chemist's propositions de-
rived from experimentation.
Applied behavior analysts measure behavior to ob-
tain answers to questions about the existence and nature
of functional relations between socially significant be-
havior and environmental variables. Measurement en-
ables comparisons of a person's behavior within and
between different environmental conditions, thereby af-
fording the possibility of drawing empirically based con-
clusions about the effects of those conditions on behavior.
For example, to learn whether allowing students with
emotional and behavioral challenges to choose the aca-
demic tasks they will work on would influence their en-
gagement with those tasks and disruptive behavior,
Dunlap and colleagues (1994) measured students' task
engagement and disruptive behaviors during choice and
no-choice conditions. Measurement revealed the level of
both target behaviors during each condition, whether and
how much the behaviors changed when choice was in-
troduced or withdrawn, and how variable or stable the
behaviors were during each condition.
The researcher's ability to achieve a scientific un-
derstanding of behavior depends on her ability to measure
it. Measurement makes possible the detection and verifi-
cation of virtually everything that has been discovered
about the selective effects of the environment on behav-
ior. The empirical databases of the basic and applied
branches of behavior analysis consist of organized col-
lections of behavioral measurements. Virtually every
graph in the Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Be-
havior and the Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis dis-
plays an ongoing record or summary of behavioral
measurement. In short, measurement provides the very
basis for learning and talking about behavior in scientif-
¡cally meaningful ways.'
Practitioners Need Measurement
Behavioral practitioners are dedicated to improving the
lives of the clients they serve by changing socially sig-
nificant behaviors. Practitioners measure behavior ini-
tially to determine the current level of a target behavior
and whether that level meets a threshold for further in-
tervention. If intervention is warranted, the practitioner
measures the extent to which his efforts are successful.
Practitioners measure behavior to find out whether and
when it has changed; the extent and duration of behavior
changes; the variability or stability of behavior before,
during, and after treatment; and whether important be-
havior changes have occurred in other settings or situa-
tions and spread to other behaviors.
Practitioners compare measurements of the target be-
havior before and after treatment (sometimes including
pre- and posttreatment measures obtained in nontreat-
ment settings or situations) to evaluate the overall effects
of behavior change programs (summative evaluation).
Frequent measures of behavior during treatment
(formative assessment) enable dynamic, data-based de-
cision making concerning the continuation, modification,
or termination of treatment.
The practitioner who does not obtain and attend to
frequent measures of the behavior targeted for interven-
tion is vulnerable to committing two kinds of preventable
mistakes: (a) continuing an ineffective treatment when
no real behavior change has occurred, or (b) discontinu-
ing an effective treatment because subjective judgment
detects no improvement (e.g., without measurement, a
teacher would be unlikely to know that a student's oral
reading has increased from 70 words per minute to 80
word per minute). Thus, direct and frequent measurement
enables practitioners to detect their successes and, equally
important, their failures so they can make changes to
change failure to success (Bushell & Baer, 1994; Green-
wood & Maheady, 1997).
Our technology of behavior change is also a technology
of behavior measurement and of experimental design; it
developed as that package, and as long as it stays in that
package, it is a self-evaluating enterprise. Its successes
are successes of known magnitude; its failures are al-
most immediately detected as failures; and whatever its
outcomes, they are attributable to known inputs and pro-
cedures rather than to chance events or coincidences.
(D. M. Baer, personal communication, October 21, 1982)
In addition to enabling ongoing program monitoring
and data-based decision making, frequent measurement
provides other important benefits to practitioners and the
clients they serve:
• Measurement helps practitioners optimize their ef-
fectiveness. To be optimally effective, a practitioner must
maximize behavior change efficiency in terms of time
and resources. Only by maintaining close, continual con-
tact with relevant outcome data can a practitioner hope to
achieve optimal effectiveness and efficiency (Bushell &
Baer, 1994). Commenting on the critical role of direct
and frequent measurement on maximizing the effective-
ness of classroom practice, Sidman (2000) noted that
teachers "must remain attuned to the pupil's messages
and be ready to try and to evaluate modifications [in in-
structional methods]. Teaching, then, is not just a matter
of changing the behavior of pupils; it is an interactive so-
cial process" (p. 23, words in brackets added). Direct and
frequent measurement is the process by which practi-
tioners hear their clients' messages.
• Measurement enables practitioners to verify the le-
gitimacy of treatments touted as "evidence based." Prac-
titioners are increasingly expected, and in some fields
mandated by law, to use evidence-based interventions.
An evidence-based practice is a treatment or intervention
method that has been demonstrated to be effective through
substantial, high-quality scientific research. For example,
the federal No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 requires
that all public school districts ensure that all children are
taught by "highly qualified" teachers using curriculum
and instructional methods validated by rigorous scientific
research. Although guidelines and quality indicators re-
garding the type (e.g., randomized clinical trials, single-
subject studies) and quantity (e.g., number of studies
published in peer-reviewed journals, minimum number
of participants) of research needed to qualify a treatment
method as an evidence-based practice have been pro-
posed, the likelihood of complete consensus is slim (e.g.,
Horner, Carr, Halle, McGee, Odom, & Wolery, 2005; U.S.
Department of Education, 2003). When implementing
any treatment, regardless of the type or amount of re-
search evidence to support it, practitioners can and should
use direct and frequent measurement to verify its effec-
tiveness with the students or clients they serve.
• Measurement helps practitioners identify and end
the use of treatments based on pseudoscience, fad, fash-
ion, or ideology. Numerous educational methods and
treatments have been claimed by their advocates as break-
throughs. Many controversial treatments and proposed
cures for people with developmental disabilities and
autism (e.g., facilitated communication, holding therapy,
megadoses of vitamins, strange diets, weighted vests,
dolphin-assisted therapy) have been promoted in the ab-
sence of sound scientific evidence of effectiveness (Heflin
& Simpson, 2002; Jacobson, Foxx, & Mulick, 2005). The
use of some of these so-called breakthrough therapies
has led to disappointment and loss of precious time at
best for many people and their families, and in some
cases, to disastrous consequences (Maurice, 1993). Even
though well-controlled studies have shown many of these
methods to be ineffective, and even though these pro-
grams are not justified because they lacked sound, sci-
entific evidence of effects, risks, and benefits, parents
and practitioners are still bombarded with sincere and
well-meaning testimonials. In the quest to find and ver-
ify effective treatments and root out those whose strongest
support is in the form of testimonials and slick adver-
tisements on the Internet, measurement is the practi-
tioner's best ally. Practitioners should maintain a healthy
skepticism regarding claims for effectiveness.
Using Plato's "Allegory of the Cave" as a metaphor
for teachers and practitioners who use untested and
pseudo-instructional ideas, Heron, Tincani, Peterson, and
Miller (2002) argued that practitioners would be better
served if they adopted a scientific approach and cast aside
pseudo-educational theories and philosophies. Practi-
tioners who insist on direct and frequent measurement
of all intervention and treatment programs will have em-
pirical support to defend against political or social pres-
sures to adopt unproven treatments. In a real sense they
will be armed with what Carl Sagan (1996) called a
"baloney detection kit."
• Measurement enables practitioners to be ac-
countable to clients, consumers, employers, and society:
Measuring the outcomes of their efforts directly and fre-
quently helps practitioners answer confidently questions
from parents and other caregivers about the effects of
their efforts.
• Measurement helps practitioners achieve ethical
standards. Ethical codes of conduct for behavior ana-
lytic practitioners require direct and frequent measure-
ment of client behavior. Determining whether a client's
right to effective treatment or effective education is being
honored requires measurement of the behaviors) for
which treatment was sought or intended (Nakano, 2004;
Van Houten et al., 1988). A behavioral practitioner who
does not measure the nature and extent of relevant be-
havior changes of the clients she serves borders on mal-
practice. Writing in the context of educators, Kauffman
(2005) offered this perspective on the relationship be-
tween measurement and ethical practice:
The teacher who cannot or will not pinpoint and mea-
sure the relevant behaviors of the students he or she is
teaching is probably not going to be very effective.....
Not to define precisely and to measure these behavioral
excesses and deficiencies, then, is a fundamental error; it
is akin to the malpractice of a nurse who decides not to
measure vital signs (heart rate, respiration rate, tempera-
ture, and blood pressure), perhaps arguing that he or she
is too busy, that subjective estimates of vital signs are
quite adequate, that vital signs are only superficial esti-
mates of the patient's health, or that vital signs do not
signify the nature of the underlying pathology. The
teaching profession is dedicated to the task of changing
behavior-changing behavior demonstrably for the bet-
ter. What can one say, then, of educational practice that
does not include precise definition and reliable measure-
ment of the behavioral change induced by the teacher's
methodology? It is indefensible. (p. 439)

Measurable Dimensions
of Behavior
If a friend asked you to measure a coffee table, you would
probably ask why he wants the table measured. In other
words, what does he want measurement to tell him about
the table? Does he need to know its height, width, and
depth? Does he want to know how much the table
weighs? Perhaps he is interested in the color of the table?
Each of these reasons for measuring the table requires
measuring a different dimensional quantity of the table
(i.e., length, mass, and light reflection).
Behavior, like coffee tables and all entities in the
physical world, also has features that can be measured
(though length, weight, and color are not among them).
Because behavior occurs within and across time, it has
three fundamental properties, or dimensional quantities,
that behavior analysts can measure. Johnston and Pen-
nypacker (1993a) described these properties as follows:
• Repeatability (also called countability): Instances
of a response class can occur repeatedly through
time (i.e., behavior can be counted).
• Temporal extent: Every instance of behavior oc-
curs during some amount of time (i.e., the duration
of behavior can be measured).
• Temporal locus: Every instance of behavior occurs
at a certain point in time with respect to other events
(i.e., when behavior occurs can be measured).
Figure 1 shows a schematic representation of re-
peatability, temporal extent, and temporal locus. Alone
and in combination, these dimensional quantities provide
the basic and derivative measures used by applied be-
havior analysts. In the following pages these and two
other measurable dimensions of behavior-its form and
strength-will be discussed.
Figure 1 Schematic representation of the
dimensional quantities of repeatability, tem-
poral extent, and temporal locus. Repeat-
ability is shown by a count of four instances
of a given response class (R,, R2, Rg, and R4)
within the observation period. The temporal
extent (i.e., duration) of each response is
shown by the raised and shaded portions
of the time line. One aspect of the temporal
locus (response latency) of two responses is
shown by the elapsed time (- L →) between
the onset of two antecedent stimulus events
(S, and S2) and the initiation of the responses
that follow (R.2 and R4).

Measures Based on Repeatability
Count
Count is a simple tally of the number of occurrences of
a behavior-for example, the number of correct and in-
correct answers written on an arithmetic practice sheet,
the number of words written correctly during a spelling
test, the number of times an employee carpools to work,
the number of class periods a student is tardy, the num-
ber of widgets produced.
Although how often a behavior occurs is often of pri-
mary interest, measures of count alone may not provide
enough information to allow practitioners to make useful
program decisions or analyses. For example, data show-
ing that Katie wrote correct answers to 5, 10, and 15 long
division problems over three consecutive math class pe-
riods suggests improving performance. However, if the
three measures of count were obtained in observation
periods of 5 minutes, 20 minutes, and 60 minutes, re-
spectively, a much different interpretation of Katie's per-
formance is suggested. Therefore, the observation period,
or counting time, should always be noted when reporting
mensureg of Count
Rate/Frequency
Combining observation time with count yields one of the
most widely used measures in applied behavior analysis,
rate (or frequency) of responding, defined as the num-
ber of responses per unit of time? A rate or frequency
measure is a ratio consisting of the dimensional quanti-
ties of count (number of responses) and time (observation
period in which the count was obtained).
Converting count to rate or frequency makes mea-
surement more meaningful. For example, knowing that
Yumi read 95 words correctly and 4 words incorrectly in
1 minute, that Lee wrote 250 words in 10 minutes, and
that Joan's self-injurious behavior occurred 17 times in 1
hour provides important information and context. Ex-
pressing the three previously reported measures of Katie's
performance in math class as rate reveals that she correctly
answered long division problems at rates of 1.0, 0.5, and
0.25 per minute over three consecutive class periods.
Researchers and practitioners typically report rate
data as a count per 10 seconds, count per minute, count
per day, count per week, count per month, or count per
year. As long as the unit of time is standard within or
across experiments, rate measures can be compared. It is
possible to compare rates of responding from counts ob-
tained during observation periods of different lengths.
For example, a student who, over four daily class activ-
ities of different durations, had 12 talk-outs in 20 minutes,
8 talk-outs in 12 minutes, 9 talk-outs in 15 minutes, and
12 talk-outs in 18 minutes had response rates of 0.60,
0.67, 0.60, and 0.67 per minute.
The six rules and guidelines described below will
help researchers and practitioners obtain, describe, and
interpret count and rate data most appropriately.
Always Reference the Counting Time. When re-
porting rate-of-response data, researchers and practi-
tioners must always include the duration of the
observation time (i.e., the counting time). Comparing
rate measures without reference to the counting time
can lead to faulty interpretations of data. For example, if
two students read from the same text at equal rates of
100 correct words per minute with no incorrect re-
sponses, it would appear that they exhibited equal per-
formances. Without knowing the counting time, however,
an evaluation of these two performances cannot be con-
ducted. Consider, for example, that Sally and Lillian
each ran at a rate of 7 minutes per mile. We cannot
compare their performances without reference to the
distances they ran. Running 1 mile at a rate of 7 minutes
per mile is a different class of behavior than running at
a rate of 7 minutes per mile over a marathon distance.
The counting time used for each session needs to ac-
company each rate measure when the counting time
changes from session to session. For instance, rather than
having a set counting time to answer arithmetic facts (e.g.,
a 1-minute timing), the teacher records the total time re-
quired for the student to complete an assigned set of arith-
metic problems during each class session. In this
situation, the teacher could report the student's correct
and incorrect answers per minute for each session, and
also report the counting times for each session because
they changed from session to session.
Calculate Correct and Incorrect Rates of Response
When Assessing Skill Development. When a participant
has an opportunity to make a correct or an incorrect re-
sponse, a rate of response for each behavior should be
reported. Calculating rate correct and rate incorrect is
crucial for evaluating skill development because an im-
proving performance cannot be assessed by knowing
only the correct rate. The rate of correct responses alone
could show an improving performance, but if incorrect
responding is also increasing, the improvement may be
illusionary. Correct and incorrect rate measures together
provide important information to help the teacher evalu-
ate how well the student is progressing. Ideally, the cor-
rect response rate accelerates toward a performance
criterion or goal, and the incorrect response rate decel-
erates to a low, stable level. Also, reporting rate correct
and rate incorrect provides for an assessment of propor-
tional accuracy while maintaining the dimensional
quantities of the measurement (e.g., 20 correct and 5 in-
correct responses per minute = 80% accuracy, or a mul-
tiple of X4 proportional accuracy).
Correct and incorrect response rates provide essen-
tial data for the assessment of fluent performance (i.e.,
proficiency) (Kubina, 2005). The assessment of fluency
requires measurement of the number of correct and in-
correct responses per unit of time (i.e., proportional ac-
curacy). Analysts cannot assess fluency using only the
correct rate because a fluenct performance must be ac-
curate also.
Take Into Account the Varied Complexity of Re-
sponses. Rate of responding is a sensitive and appro-
priate measure of skill acquisition and the development
of fluent performances only when the level of difficulty
and complexity from one response to the next remains
constant within and across observations. The rate-of-
response measures previously discussed have been
with whole units in which the response requirements
are essentially the same from one response to the next.
Many important behaviors, however, are composites of
two or more component behaviors, and different situa-
tions call for varied sequences or combinations of the
component behaviors.
One method for measuring rate of responding that
takes varied complexity into account for multiple-
component behaviors is to count the operations neces-
sary to achieve a correct response. For example, in
measuring students' math calculation performance, in-
stead of counting a two-digit plus three-digit addition
problem with regrouping as correct or incorrect, a re-
searcher might consider the number of steps that were
completed in correct sequence within each problem. Hel-
wig (1973) used the number of operations needed to pro-
duce the answers to mathematics problems to calculate
response rates. In each session the student was given 20
multiplication and division problems selected at random
from a set of 120 problems. The teacher recorded the du-
ration of time for each session. All the problems were of
two types: a Xb = c and a + b = c. For each problem the
student was asked to find one of the factors: the product,
the dividend, the divisor, or the quotient. Depending on
the problem, finding the missing factor required from one
to five operations. For example, writing the answer 275
in response to the problem 55 × 5 = ? would be scored as
four correct responses because finding the missing factor
requires four operations:
1. Multiply the ones: 5 × 5 = 25.
2. Record the 5 ones and carry the 2 tens.
3. Multiply the tens: 5 x 5(0) = 25(0).
4. Add the 2 tens carried and record the sum (27).
When more than one way to find the answer was pos-
sible, the mean number of operations was figured for that
problem. For example, the answer to the problem, 4 X? =
164, can be obtained by multiplication with two opera-
tions and by division with four operations. The mean
number of operations is three. Helwig counted the num-
ber of operations completed correctly and incorrectly per
set of 20 problems and reported correct and incorrect
rates of response.
Use Rate of Responding to Measure Free Operants.
Rate of response is a useful measure for all behaviors
characterized as free operants. The term free operant
refers to behaviors that have discrete beginning and end-
ing points, require minimal displacement of the organism
in time and space, can be emitted at nearly any time, do
not require much time for completion, and can be emit-
ted over a wide range of response rates (Baer & Fowler,
1984). Skinner (1966) used rate of response of free oper-
ants as the primary dependent variable when develop-
ing the experimental analysis of behavior. The bar press
and key peck are typical free operant responses used in
nonhuman animal laboratory studies. Human subjects in
a basic laboratory experiment might depress keys on a
keyboard. Many socially significant behaviors meet the
definition of free operants: number of words read during
a 1-minute counting period, number of head slaps per
minute, number of letter strokes written in 3 minutes. A
person can make these responses at almost any time,
each discrete response does not use much time, and each
response class can produce a wide range of rates.
Rate of response is a preferred measure for free oper-
ants because it is sensitive to changes in behavior values
(e.g., oral reading may occur at rates ranging from 0 to 250
or more correct words per minute), and because it offers
clarity and precision by defining a count per unit of time.
Do Not Use Rate to Measure Behaviors that Occur
within Discrete Trials. Rate of response is not a useful
measure for behaviors that can occur only within lim-
ited or restricted situations. For example, response rates
of behaviors that occur within discrete trials are con-
trolled by a given opportunity to emit the response.
Typical discrete trials used in nonhuman animal labora-
tory studies include moving from one end of a maze or
shuttle box to another. Typical applied examples in-
clude responses to a series of teacher-presented flash
cards; answering a question prompted by the teacher;
and, when presented with a sample color, pointing to a
color from an array of three colors that matches the
sample color. In each of these examples, the rate of re-
sponse is controlled by the presentation of the an-
tecedent stimulus. Because behaviors that occur within
discrete trials are opportunity bound, measures such as
percentage of response opportunities in which a re-
sponse was emitted or trials-to-criterion should be em-
ployed, but not rate measures.
Do Not Use Rate to Measure Continuous Behaviors
that Occur for Extended Periods of Time. Rate is also a
poor measure for continuous behaviors that occur for
extended periods of time, such as participating in play-
ground games or working at a play or activity center.
Such behaviors are best measured by whether they are
"on" or "off"' at any given time, yielding data on duration
or estimates of duration obtained by interval recording.
Celeration
Just like a car that accelerates when the driver presses
the gas pedal and decelerates when the driver releases
the pedal or steps on the brake, rates of response accel-
erate and decelerate. Celeration is a measure of how rates
of response change over time. Rate of response acceler-
ates when a participant responds faster over successive
counting periods and decelerates when responding slows
over successive observations. Celeration incorporates
three dimensional quantities: count per unit time/per unit
of time; or expressed another way, rate/per unit of time
(Graf & Lindsley, 2002; Johnston & Pennypacker,
1993a). Celeration provides researchers and practitioners
with a direct measure of dynamic patterns of behavior
change such as transitions from one steady state of re-
sponding to another and the acquisition of fluent levels of
performance (Cooper, 2005).
The Standard Celeration Chart provides a standard
format for displaying measures of celeration (Penny-
packer, Gutierrez, & Lindsley, 2003).' There are four
Standard Celeration Charts, showing rate as count (a) per
minute, (b) per week, (c) per month, and (d) per year.
These four charts provide different levels of magnifica-
tion for viewing and interpreting celeration. Response
rate is displayed on the vertical, or y, axis of the charts,
and successive calendar time in days, weeks, months, or
years is presented on the horizontal, or x, axis. Teachers
and other behavioral practitioners use the count per
minute-successive calendar days chart most often.
Celeration is displayed on all Standard Celeration
Charts with a celeration trend line. A trend line, a straight
line drawn through a series of graphed data points, visu-
ally represents the direction and degree of trend in the
data.* The celeration trend line shows a factor by which
rate of response is multiplying (accelerating) or dividing
(decelerating) across the celeration time period (e.g., rate
per week, rate per month, rate per year, rate per decade).
A celeration time period is 1/20th of the horizontal axis
of all Standard Celeration Charts. For example, the cel-
eration period for the successive calendar days chart is
per week. The celeration period for the successive cal-
endar weeks chart is per month.
A trend line drawn from the bottom left corner to the
top right corner on all Standard Celeration Charts has a
slope of 34°, and has an acceleration value of X2 (read as
"times-2"; celerations are expressed as multiples or di-
visors). It is this 34° angle of celeration, a linear mea-
sure of behavior change across time, that makes a chart
standard. For example, if the response rate were 20 per
minute on Monday, 40 per minute the next Monday, and
80 per minute on the third Monday, the celeration line
(i.e., the trend line) on the successive calendar days chart
would show a X2 acceleration, a doubling in rate per
week. A X2 acceleration on successive calendar weeks
chart is a doubling in rate every week (e.g., 20 in Week
1, 40 in Week 2, and 80 in Week 3). In most cases, cel-
eration values should not be calculated with fewer than
seven data points.
Measures Based on Temporal Extent
Duration
Duration, the amount of time in which behavior occurs,
is the basic measure of temporal extent. Researchers and
practitioners measure duration in standard units of time
(e.g., Enrique worked cooperatively with his peer tutor for
12 minutes and 24 seconds today).
Duration is important when measuring the amount
of time a person engages in the target behavior. Applied
behavior analysts measure the duration of target behav-
iors that a person has been engaging in for too long or
for too short of a time period, such as a child with de-
velopmental disabilities who tantrums for more than an
hour at a time, or a student who sticks with an academic
task for no more than 30 seconds at a time.
Duration is also an appropriate measure for behaviors
that occur at very high rates (e.g., rocking; rapid jerks of
the head, hands, legs) or task-oriented continuous be-
haviors that occur for an extended time (e.g., coopera-
tive play, on-task behavior, off-task behavior).
Behavioral researchers and practitioners commonly
measure one or both of two kinds of duration measures:
total duration per session or observation period and
duration per occurrence.
Total Duration per Session. Total duration is a
measure of the cumulative amount of time in which a
person engages in the target behavior. Applied behavior
analysts use two procedures for measuring and report-
ing total duration. One method involves recording the
cumulative amount of time a behavior occurs within a
specified observation period. For example, a teacher
concerned that a kindergarten child is spending too
much time in solitary play could record the total time
that the child is observed engaged in solitary play dur-
ing daily 30-minute free-play periods. Procedurally,
when the child engages in solitary play, the teacher ac-
tivates a stopwatch. When solitary play ceases, the
teacher stops the stopwatch but does not reset it. When
the child drifts into solitary play again, the teacher
starts the stopwatch again. Over the course of a 30-
minute free-play period, the child might have engaged
in a total of 18 minutes of solitary play. If the duration
of the free-play periods varied from day to day, the
teacher would report the total duration of solitary be-
havior as a percentage of total time observed (i.e., total
duration of solitary behavior ÷ duration of free-play pe-
riod x 100 = % of solitary behavior in one free-play pe-
riod). In this case, 18 minutes of cumulative solitary
play within a 30-minute session yields 60%.
Zhou, Iwata, Goff, and Shore (2001) used total du-
ration measurement to assess leisure-item preferences of
people with profound developmental disabilities. They
used a stopwatch to record physical engagement with an
item (i.e., contact with both hand and the item) during
2-minute trials. They reported total contact in seconds by
summing the duration values across three 2-minute trials
of each assessment. McCord, Iwata, Galensky, Elling-
son, and Thomson (2001) started and stopped a stopwatch
to measure the total duration in seconds that two adults
with severe or profound mental retardation engaged in
problem behavior.
The other measure of total duration recording is the
amount of time a person spends engaged in an activity, or
the time a person needs to complete a specific task, with-
out specifying a minimum or maximum observation pe-
riod. For example, a community planner concerned with
the amount of time senior citizens attended a new recre-
ation center could report the total number of minutes per
day that each senior spends at the center.
Duration per Occurrence. Duration per occur-
rence is a measure of the duration of time that each in-
stance of the target behavior occurs. For example,
assume that a student leaves his seat frequently and for
varying amounts of time. Each time the student leaves
his seat, the duration of his out-of-seat behavior could
be recorded with a stopwatch. When he leaves his seat,
the stopwatch is engaged. When he returns, the stop-
watch is disengaged, the total time recorded, and the
stopwatch reset to zero. When the student leaves his
seat again, the process is repeated. The resulting mea-
sures yield data on the duration of occurrences of each
out-of-seat behavior over the observation period.
In a study evaluating an intervention for decreasing
noisy disruptions by children on a school bus, Greene,
Bailey, and Barber (1981) used a sound-recording device
that automatically recorded both the number of times that
outbursts of sound exceeded a specified threshold and
the duration in seconds that each outburst remained above
that threshold. The researchers used the mean duration
per occurrence of noisy disruptions as one measure for
evaluating the intervention's effects.
Selecting and Combining Measures of Count and
Duration. Measurements of count, total duration, and
duration per occurrence provide different views of be-
havior. Count and duration measure different dimen-
sional quantities of behavior, and these differences
provide the basis for selecting which dimension to mea-
sure. Event recording meaures repeatability, whereas
duration recording measures temporal extent. For in-
stance, a teacher concerned about a student who is out
of her seat "too much" could tally each time the student
leaves her seat. The behavior is discrete and is unlikely
to occur at such a high rate that counting the number of
occurrences would be difficult. Because any instance of
out-of-seat behavior has the potential to occur for an
extended time and the amount of time the student is
out of her seat is a socially significant aspect of the
behavior, the teacher could also use total duration
recording.
Using count to measure out-of-seat behavior pro-
vides the number of times the student left her seat. A mea-
sure of total duration will indicate the amount and
proportion of time that the student was out of her seat
during the observation period. Because of the relevance
of temporal extent in this case, duration would provide a
better measurement than count would. The teacher might
observe that the student left her seat once in a 30-minute
observation period. One occurrence of the behavior in 30
minutes might not be viewed as a problem. However, if
the student remained out of her seat for 29 of the obser-
vation period's 30 minutes, a very different view of the
behavior is obtained.
In this situation, duration per occurrence would
make an even better measurement selection than either
count or total duration recording would. That is because
duration per occurrence measures the repeatability and
the temporal extent of the behavior. A duration-per-
occurrence measure would give the teacher information
on the number of times the student was out of her seat
and the duration of each occurrence. Duration per oc-
currence is often preferable to total duration because it
is sensitive to the number of instances of the target be-
havior. Further, if a total duration measure is needed for
other purposes, the individual durations of each of the
counted and timed occurrences could be summed. How-
ever, if behavior endurance (e.g., academic responding.
motor movements) is the major consideration, then total
duration recording may be sufficient (e.g., oral reading
for 3 minutes, free writing for 10 minutes, running for
10 kilometers).
Measures Based on Temporal Locus
As stated previously, temporal locus refers to when an in-
stance of behavior occurs with respect to other events of in-
terest. The two types of events most often used by researchers
as points of reference for measuring temporal locus are the
onset of antecedent stimulus events and the cessation of the
previous response. These two points of reference provide
the context for measuring response latency and interresponse
time, the two measures of temporal locus most frequently
reported in the behavior analysis literature.
Response Latency
Response latency (or, more commonly, latency) is a mea-
sure of the elapsed time between the onset of a stimulus
and the initiation of a subsequent response.' Latency is an
appropriate measure when the researcher or practitioner
is interested in how much time occurs between an op-
portunity to emit a behavior and when the behavior is ini-
tiated. For example, a student might exhibit excessive
delays in complying with teacher directions. Response
latency would be the elapsed time from the end of the
teacher's direction and when the student begins to com-
ply with the direction. Interest can also focus on latencies
that are too short. A student may give incorrect answers
because she does not wait for the teacher to complete the
questions. An adolescent who, at the slightest provocation
from a peer, immediately retaliates has no time to con-
sider alternative behaviors that could defuse the situation
and lead to improved interactions.
Researchers typically report response latency data
by the mean, median and range of individual latencies
measures per observation period. For example, Lerman,
Kelley, Vorndran, Kuhn, and LaRue (2002) used a latency
measure to assess the effects of different reinforcement
magnitudes (i.e., 20 seconds, 60 seconds, or 300 seconds
of access to a reinforcer) on postreinforcement pause.
The researchers measured the number of seconds from
the end of each reinforcer-access interval to the first in-
stance of the target behavior (a communication response).
They then calculated and graphed the mean, median, and
range of response latencies measured during each ses-
sion (see Lerman et al., 2002, p. 41).
Interresponse Time
Interresponse time (IRT) is the amount of time that
elapses between two consecutive instances of a response
class. Like response latency, IRT is a measure of tempo-
ral locus because it identifies when a specific instance of
behavior occurs with respect to another event (i.e., the
previous response). Figure 2 shows a schematic repre-
sentation of interresponse time.
Although it is a direct measure of temporal locus,
IRT is functionally related to rate of response. Shorter
IRIs coexist with higher rates of response, and longer
IRIs are found within lower response rates. Applied
behavior analysts measure IRT when the time between
instances of a response class is important. IRT provides
a basic measure for implementing and evaluating
interventions using differential reinforcement of low
rates (DRL), a procedure for using reinforcement to re-
duce the rate of responding. Like latency data, IRT
measures are typically reported and displayed graphically
by mean (or median) and range per observation period.
Figure 2 Schematic representation of
three interresponse times (IRT). IRT, the
elapsed time between the termination of
one response and the initiation of the next
response, is a commonly used measure of
temporal locus.
Derivative Measures
Percentage and trials-to-criterion, two forms of data de-
rived from direct measures of dimensional quantities of
behavior, are frequently used in applied behavior analysis.
Percentage
A percentage is a ratio (i.e., a proportion) formed by
combining the same dimensional quantities, such as count
(i.e., number + number) or time (i.e., duration + duration;
latency + latency). A percentage expresses the propor-
tional quantity of some event in terms of the number of
times the event occurred per 100 opportunities that the
event could have occurred. For example, if a student an-
swered correctly 39 of 50 items on an exam, an accuracy
percentage can be calculated by dividing the number of
correct answers by the total number of test items and mul-
tiplying that product by 100 (39 + 50 = .78 × 100 = 78%).
Percentage is frequently used in applied behavior
analysis to report the proportion of total correct responses.
For example, Ward and Carnes (2002) used a percentage-
of-correct-performances measure in their study evaluat-
ing the effects of goal setting and public posting on skill
execution of three defensive skills by linebackers on a
college football team. The researchers recorded counts
of correct and incorrect reads, drops, and tackles by each
player and calculated accuracy percentages based on the
number of opportunities for each type of play.
Percentage is also used frequently in applied behav-
ior analysis to report the proportion of observation inter-
vals in which the target behavior occurred. These
measures are typically reported as a proportion of inter-
vals within a session. Percentage can also be calculated
for an entire observation session. In a study analyzing
the differential effects of reinforcer rate, quality, imme-
diacy, and response effort on the impulsive behavior of
students with attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder,
Neef, Bicard, and Endo (2001) reported the percentage of
time each student allocated to two sets of concurrently
available math problems (e.g., time allocated to math
problems yielding high-quality delayed reinforcers ÷ total
time possible 100 = %).
Percentages are used widely in education, psychol-
ogy, and the popular media, and most people understand
proportional relationships expressed as percentages.
However, percentages are often used improperly and fre-
quently misunderstood. Thus, we offer several notes of
caution on the use and interpretation of percentages.
Percentages most accurately reflect the level of and
changes in behavior when calculated with a divisor (or de-
nominator) of 100 or more. However, most percentages
used by behavioral researchers and practitioners are cal-
culated with divisors much smaller than 100. Percentage
measures based on small divisors are unduly affected by
small changes in behavior. For example, a change in count
of just 1 response per 10 opportunities changes the per-
centage by 10%. Guilford (1965) cautioned that it is unwise
to compute percentages with divisors smaller than 20. For
research purposes, we recommend that whenever possi-
ble, applied behavior analysts design measurement sys-
tems in which resultant percentages are based on no fewer
than 30 response opportunities or observation intervals.
Sometimes changes in percentage can erroneously
suggest improving performance. For example, an accu-
racy percentage could increase even though the frequency
of incorrect responses remains the same or worsens. Con-
sider a student whose accuracy in answering math prob-
lems on Monday is 50% (5 of 10 problems answered
correctly) and on Tuesday it is 60% (12 of 20 problems
answered correctly). Even with the improved proportional
accuracy, the number of errors increased (from 5 on Mon-
day to 8 on Tuesday).
Although no other measure communicates propor-
tional relationships better than percentage does, its use
as a behavioral quantity is limited because a percentage
has no dimensional quantities.' For example, percentage
cannot be used to assess the development of proficient
or fluent behavior because an assessment of proficiency
cannot occur without reference to count and time, but it
can show the proportional accuracy of a targeted behav-
ior during the development of proficiency.
Another limitation of percentage as a measure of be-
havior change is that lower and upper limits are imposed
on the data. For example, using percent correct to assess
a student's reading ability imposes an artificial ceiling
on the measurement of performance. A learner who cor-
rectly reads 100% of the words she is presented cannot
improve in terms of the measure used.
Different percentages can be reported from the same
data set, with each percentage suggesting significantly dif-
ferent interpretations. For example, consider a student who
scores 4 correct (20%) on a 20-item pretest and 16 correct
(80%) when the same 20 items are given as a posttest. The
most straightforward description of the student's im-
provement from pretest to posttest (60%) compares the
two measures using the original basis or divisor (20 items).
Because the student scored 12 more items correct on the
posttest than he did on the pretest, his performance on the
posttest could be reported as an increase (gain score) over
his pretest performance of 60%. And given that the stu-
dent's posttest score represented a fourfold improvement
in correct responses, some might report the posttest score
as a 300% improvement of the pretest—a completely dif-
ferent interpretation from an improvement of 40%.
Although percentages greater than 100% are some-
times reported, strictly speaking, doing so is incorrect.
Although a behavior change greater than 100% may seem
impressive, it is a mathematical impossibility. A percent-
age is a proportional measure of a total set, where x (the
proportion) of y (the total) is expressed as 1 part in 100.
A proportion of something cannot exceed the total of that
something or be less than zero (i.e., there is no such thing
as a negative percentage). Every coach's favorite athlete
who "always gives 110%" simply does not exist.?
Trials-to-Criterion
Trials-to-criterion is a measure of the number of re-
sponse opportunities needed to achieve a predetermined
level of performance. What constitutes a trial depends on
the nature of the target behavior and the desired perfor-
mance level. For a skill such as shoe tying, each oppor-
tunity to tie a shoe could be considered a trial, and
trials-to-criterion data are reported as the number of tri-
als required for the learner to tie a shoe correctly without
prompts or assistance. For behaviors involving problem
solving or discriminations that must be applied across a
large number of examples to be useful, a trial might con-
sist of a block, or series of response opportunities, in
which each response opportunity involves the presenta-
tion of a different exemplar of the problem or discrimi-
nation. For example, a trial for discriminating between
the short and long vowel sounds of the letter o could be
a block of 10 consecutive opportunities to respond, in
which each response opportunity is the presentation of a
word containing the letter o, with short-vowel and long-
vowel o words (e.g., hot, boat) presented in random order.
Trials-to-criterion data could be reported as the number
of blocks of 10 trials required for the learner to correctly
pronounce the o sound in all 10 words. Count would be
the basic measure from which the trials-to-criterion data
would be derived.
Other basic measures, such as rate, duration, and la-
tency, can also be used to determine trials-to-criterion
data. For example, a trials-to-criterion measure for solv-
ing two-digit minus two-digit subtraction problems re-
quiring borrowing could be the number of practice sheets
of 20 randomly generated and sequenced problems a
learner completes before she is able to solve all 20 prob-
lems on a single sheet in 3 minutes or less.
Trials-to-criterion data are often calculated and re-
ported as an ex post facto measure of one important aspect
of the "cost" of a treatment or instructional method. For
example, Trask-Tyler, Grossi, and Heward (1994) reported
the number of instructional trials needed by each of three
students with developmental disabilities and visual im-
pairments to prepare three food items from recipes with-
out assistance on two consecutive times over two sessions.
Each recipe entailed from 10 to 21 task-analyzed steps.
Trials-to-criterion data are used frequently to com-
pare the relative efficiency of two or more treatments or
instructional methods. For example, by comparing the
number of practice trials needed for a student to master
weekly sets of spelling words practiced in two different
ways, a teacher could determine whether the student
learns spelling words more efficiently with one method
than with another. Sometimes trials-to-criterion data are
supplemented by information on the number of minutes
of instruction needed to reach predetermined performance
criteria (e.g., Holcombe, Wolery, Werts, & Hrenkevich
1993; Repp, Karsh, Johnson, & VanLaarhoven, 1994).
Trials-to-criterion measures can also be collected and
analyzed as a dependent variable throughout a study. For
example, R. Baer (1987) recorded and graphed trials-to-
criterion on a paired-associates memory task as a depen-
dent variable in a study assessing the effects of caffeine
on the behavior of preschool children.
Trials-to-criterion data can also be useful for assess-
ing a learner's increasing competence in acquiring a re-
lated class of concepts. For instance, teaching a concept
such as the color red to a child could consist of present-
ing "red" and "not red" items to the child and providing
differential reinforcement for correct responses. Trials-
to-criterion data could be collected of the number of "red"
and "not red" exemplars required before the child
achieves a specified level of performance with the dis-
crimination. The same instructional and data collection
procedures could then be used in teaching other colors to
the child. Data showing that the child achieves mastery of
each newly introduced color in fewer instructional trials
than it took to learn previous colors might be evidence of
the child's increasing agility in learning color concepts.
Definitional Measures
In addition to the basic and derived dimensions already
discussed, behavior can also be defined and measured by
its form and intensity. Neither form (i.e., topography) nor
intensity (i.e., magnitude) of responding is a fundamen-
tal dimensional quantity of behavior, but each is an im-
portant quantitative parameter for defining and verifying
the occurrence of many response classes. When behav-
ioral researchers and practitioners measure the topogra-
phy or magnitude of a response, they do so to determine
whether the response represents an occurrence of the tar-
get behavior. Occurrences of the target behavior that are
verified on the basis of topography or magnitude are then
measured by one or more aspects of count, temporal ex-
tent, or temporal locus. In other words, measuring topog-
raphy or magnitude is sometimes necessary to determine
whether instances of the targeted response class have oc
curred, but the subsequent quantification of those re
sponses is recorded, reported, and analyzed in terms ol
the fundamental and derivative measures of count, rate
duration, latency, IRT, percentage, and trials-to-criterion
Topography
Topography, which refers to the physical form or shape ol
a behavior, is both a measurable and malleable dimension ol
behavior. Topography is a measurable quantity of behavio
because responses of varying form can be detected from one
another. That topography is a malleable aspect of behavio
is evidenced by the fact that responses of varying form are
shaped and selected by their consequences.
A group of responses with widely different topogra-
phies may serve the same function (i.e., form a response
class). For example, each of the different ways of writing
the word topography, shown in Figure 3, would pro-
duce the same effect on most readers. Membership in
some response classes, however, is limited to responses
within a narrow range of topographies. Although each of
the response topographies in Figure 3 would meet the
functional requirements of most written communications,
none would meet the standards expected of an advanced
calligraphy student.
Topography is of obvious and primary importance in
performance areas in which form, style, or artfulness of
behavior is valued in its own right (e,g., painting, sculpt-
ing, dancing, gymnastics). Measuring and providing dif-
ferential consequences for responses of varied topographies
is also important when the functional outcomes of the be-
havior correlate highly with specific topographies. A stu-
dent who sits with good posture and looks at the teacher is
more likely to receive positive attention and opportunities
to participate academically than is a student who slouches
with her head on the desk (Schwarz & Hawkins, 1970).
Basketball players who execute foul shots with a certain
form make a higher percentage of shots than they do when
they shoot idiosyncratically (Kladopoulos & McComas,
2001).
Trap, Milner-Davis, Joseph, and Cooper (1978) mea-
sured the topography of cursive handwriting by first-
grade students. Plastic transparent overlays were used to
detect deviations from model letters in lower- and upper-
case letters written by the children (see Figure 4). The
researchers counted the number of correct letter strokes—
those that met all of the specified topographical criteria
(e.g., all letter strokes contained within the 2-mm para-
meters of the overlay, connected, complete, sufficient
length)—and used the percentage correct of all strokes
written by each student to assess the effects of visual and
verbal feedback and a certificate of achievement on the
children's acquisition of cursive handwriting skills.
Magnitude
Magnitude refers to the force or intensity with which a
response is emitted. The desired outcomes of some be-
haviors are contingent on responding at or above (or
below) a certain intensity or force. A screwdriver must
be turned with sufficient force to insert or remove screws;
a pencil must be applied to paper with enough force to
leave legible marks. On the other hand, applying too
much torque to a misaligned screw or bolt is likely to
strip the threads, and pushing too hard with a pencil will
break its point.
The magnitude of speech or other vocalizations
that were considered too loud or too soft has been mea-
sured in several studies. Schwarz and Hawkins (1970)
measured the voice loudness of Karen, a sixth-grade
girl who spoke so softly in class that her voice was
usually inaudible to others. Karen's voice was recorded
on videotape during two class periods each day. (The
videotape was also used to obtain data on two other
behaviors: face touching and the amount of time Karen
sat in a slouched position). The researchers then played
the videotape into an audiotape recorder with a loud-
ness indicator and counted the number of times the
needle went above a specified level on the loudness
meter. Schwarz and Hawkins used the number (pro-
portion) of needle inflections per 100 words spoken
by Karen as the primary measure for evaluating the ef-
fects of an intervention on increasing her voice vol-
ume during class.
Greene and colleagues (1981) used an automated
sound-recording device to measure the magnitude of
noisy disruptions by middle school students on a school
bus. The recording device could be adjusted so that only
sound levels above a predetermined threshold activated it.
The device automatically recorded both the number of
times outbursts of sound exceeded a specified threshold
(93 dB) and the total duration in seconds that the sound
remained above that threshold. When the noise level ex-
ceeded the specified threshold, a light on a panel that all
students could see was activated automatically. When the
light was off, students listened to music during the bus
ride; when the number of noisy disruptions was below a
criterion, they participated in a raffle for prizes. This in-
tervention drastically reduced the outbursts and other
problem behaviors as well. Greene and colleagues re-
ported both the number and the mean duration per oc-
currence of noisy disruptions as measures of evaluating
the intervention's effects.®
Table 1 summarizes the measurable dimensions of
behavior and considerations for their use.
Procedures
for Measuring Behavior
Procedures for measuring behavior used most often by
applied behavior analysts involve one or a combination
of the following: event recording, timing, and various
time sampling methods.
Event Recording
Event recording encompasses a wide variety of proce-
dures for detecting and recording the number of times a
behavior of interest occurs. For example, Cuvo, Lerch,
Leurquin, Gaffaney, and Poppen (1998) used event
recording while analyzing the effects of work require-
ments and reinforcement schedules on the choice behav-
ior of adults with mental retardation and preschool
children while they were engaged in age-appropriate tasks
(e.g., adults sorting silverware, children tossing beanbags
or jumping hurdles). The researchers recorded each piece
of silverware sorted, each beanbag tossed, and each hur-
dle jumped.
Devices for Event Recording
Although pencil and paper are sufficient for making event
recordings, the following devices and procedures may
facilitate the counting process.
• Wrist counters. Wrist counters are useful for tallying
student behaviors. Golfers use these counters to tally
strokes. Most wrist counters record from 0 to 99 re-
sponses. These counters can be purchased from
sporting goods stores or large department stores.
• Hand-tally digital counters. These digital counters
are similar to wrist counters. Hand-tally counters
are frequently used in grocery chain stores, cafete-
rias, military mess halls, and tollgates to tally the
number of people served. These mechanical coun-
ters are available in single or multiple channels and
fit comfortably in the palm of the hand. With prac-
tice, practitioners can operate the multiple-channel
counters rapidly and reliably with just one hand.
These digital counters can be obtained from office
supply stores.
• Abacus wrist and shoestring counters. Landry and
McGreevy (1984) described two types of abacus
counters for measuring behavior. The abacus wrist
counter is made from pipe cleaners and beads at-
tached to a leather wristband to form an abacus
with rows designated as ones and tens. An observer
can tally from 1 to 99 occurrences of behavior by
sliding the beads in abacus fashion. Responses are
tallied in the same way on an abacus shoestring
counter except the beads slide on shoestrings at-
tached to a key ring, which is attached to the ob-
server's belt, belt loop, or some other piece of
clothing such as a buttonhole.
• Masking tape. Teachers can mark tallies on mask-
ing tape attached to their wrists or desk.
• Pennies, buttons, paper clips. One item can be
moved from one pocket to another each time the
target behavior occurs.
• Pocket calculators. Pocket calculators can be used
to tally events.
Event recording also applies to the measurement of
discrete trial behaviors, in which the count for each trial
or opportunity to respond is either 1 or 0, representing
the occurrence or nonoccurrence of the behavior. Figure
5 shows a form used to record the occurrence of imita-
tion responses by a preschooler with disabilities and his
typically developing peer partner within a series of in-
structional trials embedded into ongoing classroom ac-
tivities (Valk, 2003). For each trial, the observer recorded
the occurrence of a correct response, no response, an ap-
proximation, or an inappropriate response by the target
child and the peer by circling or marking a slash through
letters representing each behavior. The form also allowed
the observer to record whether the teacher prompted or
praised the target child's imitative behavior.
Considerations with Event Recording
Event recording is easy to do. Most people can tally dis-
crete behaviors accurately, often on the first attempt. If
the response rate is not too high, event recording does
not interfere with other activities. A teacher can con-
tinue with instruction while tallying occurrences of the
target behavior.
Event recording provides a useful measurement for
most behaviors. However, each instance of the target be-
havior must have discrete beginning and ending points.
Event recording is applicable for target behaviors such as
students' oral responses to questions, students' written
answers to math problems, and a parent praising his son
or daughter. Behaviors such as humming are hard to mea-
sure with event recording because an observer would have
difficulty determining when one hum ends and another
begins. Event recording is difficult for behaviors defined
without specific discrete action or object relations, such
as engagement with materials during free-play activity.
Because engagement with materials does not present a
specific discrete action or object relation, an observer may
have difficulty judging when one engagement starts and
ends, and then another engagement begins.
Another consideration with event recording is that
the target behaviors should not occur at such high rates
that an observer would have difficulty counting each dis-
crete occurrence accurately. High-frequency behaviors
that may be difficult to measure with event recording in-
clude rapid talking, body rocks, and tapping objects.
Also, event recording does not produce accurate
measures for target behaviors that occur for extended
time periods, such as staying on task, listening, playing
quietly alone, being out of one's seat, or thumb sucking.
Task-oriented or continuous behaviors (e.g., being "on
task") are examples of target behaviors for which event
recording would not be indicated. Classes of continuous
behaviors occurring across time are usually not a prime
concern of applied behavior analysts. For example, read-
ing per se is of less concern than the number of words
read correctly and incorrectly, or the number of reading
comprehension questions answered correctly and incor-
rectly. Similarly, behaviors that demonstrate understand-
ing are more important to measure than "listening
behavior," and the number of academic responses a stu-
dent emits during an independent seatwork period is more
important than being on task.
Timing
Researchers and practitioners use a variety of timing de-
vices and procedures to measure duration, response la-
tency, and interresponse time.
Timing the Duration of Behavior
Applied researchers often use semi-automated computer-
driven systems for recording durations. Practitioners,
however, will most likely use nonautomated instruments
for recording duration. The most precise nonautomated
instrument is a digital stopwatch. Practitioners can use
wall clocks or wristwatches to measure duration, but the
measures obtained will be less precise than those obtained
with a stopwatch.
The procedure for recording the total duration of a
target behavior per session with a stopwatch is to (a) ac-
tivate the stopwatch as the behavior starts and (b) stop
the watch at the end of the episode. Then, without reset-
ting the stopwatch, the observer starts the stopwatch again
at the beginning of the second occurrence of the behav-
ior and stops the watch at the end of the second episode.
The observer continues to accumulate the durations of
time in this fashion until the end of the observation pe-
riod, and then transfers the total duration of time show-
ing on the stopwatch to a data sheet.
Gast and colleagues (2000) used the following pro-
cedure for measuring duration with a foot switch and tape
recorder that enables a practitioner to use both hands to
present stimulus materials or interact with the participant
in other ways throughout the session.
The duration of a student's target behavior was recorded
by using a cassette audio tape recorder with a blank tape
in it that was activated by the instructor using her foot to
activate a jellybean switch connected to the tape
recorder. When the student engaged in the target behav-
ior, the teacher activated the switch that started the tape
running. When the student stopped engaging in the be-
havior, the teacher stopped the tape by activating the
switch again. At the end of the session the teacher said,
"end" and stopped the tape recorder and rewound the
tape. [After the session the teacher] then played the tape
from the beginning until the "end" and timed the dura-
tion with a stopwatch. (p. 398)
McEntee and Saunders (1997) recorded duration per
occurrence using a bar code data collection system to
measure (a) functional and stereotypic engagements with
materials and (b) stereotypy without interaction with ma-
terials and other aberrant behaviors. They created and
arranged bar codes on a data sheet to record the behav-
iors of four adolescents with severe to profound mental
retardation. A computer with a bar code font and soft-
ware read the bar code, recording the year, month, day,
and time of particular events. The bar code data collec-
tion system provided real-time duration measurements
of engagements with materials and aberrant behaviors.
Timing Response Latency
and Interresponse Time
Procedures for measuring latency and interresponse time
(IRT) are similar to procedures used to measure duration.
Measuring latency requires the precise detection and
recording of the time that elapses from the onset of each
occurrence of the antecedent stimulus event of interest
and the onset of the target behavior: Measuring IRIs re-
quires recording the precise time that elapses from the
termination of each occurrence of the target behavior to
the onset of the next. Wehby and Hollahan (2000) mea-
sured the latency of compliance by an elementary school
student with learning disabilities to instructions to begin
math assignments. Using a laptop computer with soft-
ware designed to detect latency (see Tapp, Wehby, & Ellis,
1995, for the MOOSES observation system), they mea-
sured latency from the request to the onset of compliance.
Time Sampling
Time sampling refers to a variety of methods for ob-
serving and recording behavior during intervals or at spe-
cific moments in time. The basic procedure involves
dividing the observation period into time intervals and
then recording the presence or absence of behavior within
or at the end of each interval.
Time sampling was developed originally by etholo-
gists studying the behavior of animals in the field
(Charlesworth & Spiker, 1975). Because it was not pos-
sible or feasible to observe the animals continuously, these
scientists arranged systematic schedules of relatively brief
but frequent observation intervals. The measures obtained
from these "samples" are considered to be representative
of the behavior during the entire time period from which
they were collected. For example, much of our knowl-
edge about the behavior of gorillas is based on data col-
lected by researchers such as Jane Goodall using time
sampling observation methods.
Three forms of time sampling used often by applied
behavior analysts are whole-interval recording, partial-
interval recording, and momentary time sampling.
Whole-Interval Recording
Whole-interval recording is often used to measure contin-
uous behaviors (e.g., cooperative play) or behaviors that
occur at such high rates that observers have difficulty dis-
tinguishing one response from another (e.g., rocking, hum-
ming) but can detect whether the behavior is occurring at any
given time. With whole-interval recording, the observation
period is divided into a series of brief time intervals (typi-
cally from 5 to 10 seconds). At the end of each interval, the
observer records whether the target behavior occurred
throughout the interval. If a student's on-task behavior is
being measured via 10-second whole-interval recording,
the student would need to meet the definition of being on
task during an entire interval for the behavior to be recorded
as occurring in that interval. The student who was on task
for 9 of an interval's 10 seconds would be scored as not
being on task for that interval. Hence, data obtained with
whole-interval recording usually underestimate the overall
percentage of the observation period in which the behavior
actually occurred. The longer the observation intervals, the
greater the degree to which whole-interval recording will
underestimate the actual occurrence of the behavior.
Data collected with whole-interval recording are re-
ported as the percentage of total intervals in which the
target behavior was recorded as occurring. Because they
represent the proportion of the entire observation period
that the person was engaged in the target behavior, whole-
interval recording data yield an estimate of total dura-
tion. For example, assume a whole-interval observation
period consisting of six 10-second intervals (a one-minute
time frame). If the target behavior was recorded as oc-
curring for four of these whole intervals and not occur-
ring for the remaining two intervals, it would yield a total
duration estimate of 40 seconds.
Figure 6 shows an example of a whole-interval
recording form used to measure the on-task behavior of
four students during academic seatwork time (Ludwig,
2004). Each minute was divided into four 10-second ob-
servation intervals; each observation interval was followed
by 5 seconds in which the observer recorded the occur-
rence or nonoccurrence of target behavior during the pre-
ceding 10 seconds. The observer first watched Student 1
continuously for 10 seconds, and then she looked away
during the next 5 seconds and recorded whether Student
1 had been on task throughout the previous 10 seconds by
circling YES or NO on the recording form. After the 5-
second interval for recording Student 1's behavior, the
observer looked up and watched Student 2 continuously
for 10 seconds, after which she recorded Student 2's be-
havior on the form. The same procedure for observing
and recording was used for Students 3 and 4. In this way,
the on-task behavior of each student was observed and
recorded for one 10-second interval per minute.
Continuing the sequence of observation and record-
ing intervals over a 30-minute observation period pro-
vided thirty 10-second measures (i.e., samples) of each
student's on-task behavior. The data in Figure 6 show
that the four students were judged by the observer to have
been on task during Session 17 for 87%, 93%, 60%, and
73% of the intervals, respectively. Although the data are
intended to represent the level of each student's behavior
throughout the observation period, it is important to re-
member that each student was observed for a total of only
5 of the observation period's 30 minutes.
Observers using any form of time sampling should
always make a recording response of some sort in every
interval. For example, an observer using a form such as
the one in Figure 6 would record the occurrence or
nonoccurrence of the target behavior in each interval by
circling YES or NO. Leaving unmarked intervals in-
creases the likelihood of losing one's place on the record-
ing form and marking the result of an observation in the
wrong interval space.
All time sampling methods require a timing device
to signal the beginning and end of each observation and
recording interval. Observers using pencil, paper, clip-
board, and timers for interval measurement will often at-
tach a stopwatch to a clipboard. However, observing and
recording behavior while having to look simultaneously
at a stopwatch is likely to have a negative impact on the
accuracy of measurement. An effective solution to this
problem is for the observer to listen by earphone to
prerecorded audio cues signaling the observation and
recording intervals. For example, observers using a
whole-interval recording procedure such as the one just
described could listen to an audio recording with a se-
quence of prerecorded statements such as the following:
"Observe Student 1," 10 seconds later, "Record Stu-
dent 1," 5 seconds later, "Observe Student 2," 10 seconds
later, "Record Student 2," and so on.
Tactile prompting devices can also be used to signal
observation intervals. For example, the Gentle Re-
minder (dan@gentlereminder.com) and MotivAider
(www.habitchange.com) are small timing instruments
that vibrate at the time intervals programmed by the user.

Partial-Interval Recording
When using partial-interval recording, the observer
records whether the behavior occurred at any time during
the interval. Partial-interval time sampling is not con-
cerned with how many times the behavior occurred dur-
ing the interval or how long the behavior was present,
just that it occurred at some point during the interval. If
the target behavior occurs multiple times during the in-
terval, it is still scored as occurring only once. An ob-
server using partial-interval recording to measure a
student's disruptive behavior would mark an interval if
disruptive behavior of any form meeting the target be-
havior definition occurred for any amount of time dur-
ing the interval. That is, an interval would be scored as
disruptive behavior even if the student was disruptive for
only 1 second of a 6-second interval. Because of this,
data obtained via partial-interval recording often overes-
timate the overall percentage of the observation period
(i.e., total duration) that the behavior actually occurred.
Partial-interval data, like whole-interval data, are
most often reported as a percentage of total intervals in
which the target behavior was scored. Partial-interval data
are used to represent the proportion of the entire obser-
vation period in which the target behavior occurred, but
unlike whole-interval recording, the results of partial-
interval recording do not provide any information on du-
ration per occurrence. That is because any instance of the
target behavior, regardless of how brief its duration, will
cause an interval to be scored.
If partial-interval recording with brief observation
intervals is used to measure discrete responses of short
duration per occurrence, the data obtained provide a crude
estimate of the minimum rate of responding. For exam-
ple, data showing that a behavior measured by partial-
interval recording consisting of 6-second contiguous
intervals (i.e., successive intervals are not separated by
time in which the behavior is not observed) occurred in
50% of the total intervals indicates a minimum response
rate of five responses per minute (on the average, at least
one response occurred in 5 of the 10 intervals per minute).
Although partial-interval recording often overestimates
the total duration, it is likely to underestimate the rate of
a high-frequency behavior. This is because an interval in
which a person made eight nonverbal sounds would be
scored the same as an interval in which the person made
only one sound. When the evaluation and understanding
of a target behavior requires an accurate and sensitive
measure of response rate, event recording should be used.
Because an observer using partial-interval recording
needs to record only that a behavior has occurred at any
point during each interval (compared to having to watch
the behavior throughout the entire interval with whole-
interval), it is possible to measure multiple behaviors con-
currently. Figure 7 shows a portion of a form for
measuring four response classes by three students using
partial-interval recording with 20-second intervals. The
observer watches Student I throughout the first 20-second
interval, Student 2 for the next 20 seconds, and Student
3 for the next 20 seconds. Each student is observed for 20
seconds out of each minute of the observation period. If
a student engages in any of the behaviors being measured
at any time during an observation interval, the observer
marks the letters) corresponding to those behaviors. If a
student engages in none of the behaviors being measured
during an interval, the observer marks N to indicate no
occurrences of the target behaviors. For example, during
the first interval in which Student 1 was observed, he
said, "Pacific Ocean" (an academic response). During
the first interval in which Student 2 was observed, she
left her seat and threw a pencil (a behavior within the re-
sponse class "other disruptive behavior"). Student 3 emit-
ted none of the four target behaviors during the first
interval that he was observed.
Momentary Time Sampling
An observer using momentary time sampling records
whether the target behavior is occurring at the moment
that each time interval ends. If conducting momentary
time sampling with 1-minute intervals, an observer would
look at the person at the 1-minute mark of the observa-
tion period, determine immediately whether the target
behavior was occurring, and indicate that decision on the
recording form. One minute later (i.e., 2 minutes into the
observation period), the observer would look again at
the person and then score the presence or absence of the
target behavior. This procedure would continue until the
end of the observation period.
As with interval recording methods, data from mo-
mentary time sampling are typically reported as per-
centages of the total intervals in which the behavior
occurred and are used to estimate the proportion of the
total observation period that the behavior occurred
A major advantage of momentary time sampling is
that the observer does not have to attend continuosly to
measurement, whereas interval recording methods de-
mand the undivided attention of the observer.
Because the person is observed for only a brief mo-
ment, much behavior will be missed with momentary
time sampling. Momentary time sampling is used pri-
marily to measure continuous activity behaviors such as
engagement with a task or activity, because such behav-
iors are easily identified. Momentary time sampling is
not recommended for measuring low-frequency, short-
duration behaviors (Saudargas & Zanolli, 1990).
A number of studies have compared measures ob-
tained by momentary time sampling using intervals of
varying duration with measures of the same behavior
obtained by continuous duration recording (e.g., Gunter,
Venn, Patrick, Miller, & Kelly, 2003; Powell, Martin-
dale, Kulp, Martindale, & Bauman, 1977; Powell, Mar-
tindale, & Kulp, 1975; Simpson & Simpson, 1977;
Saudargas and Zanolli 1990; Test & Heward, 1984). In
general, this research has found that momentary time
sampling both overestimates and underestimates the con-
tinuous duration measure when time intervals are greater
than 2 minutes. With intervals less than 2 minutes, the
data obtained using momentary time sampling more
closely matched that obtained using the continuous du-
ration measure.
Results of a study by Gunter and colleagues (2003)
are representative of this research. These researchers com-
pared measures of on-task behavior of three elementary
students with emotional/behavioral disorders over seven
sessions obtained by momentary time sampling conducted
at 2-, 4-, and 6-minute intervals with measures of the same
behavior obtained by continuous duration recording. Mea-
sures obtained using the 4-minute and 6-minute time sam-
pling method produced data paths that were highly
discrepant with the data obtained by continuous mea-
surement, but data obtained using the 2-minute interval
had a high degree of correspondence with the measures
obtained using the continuous duration method. Figure
8 shows the results for one of the students.

Planned Activity Check
A variation of momentary time sampling, planned ac-
tivity check (PLACHECK) uses head counts to mea-
sure "group behavior." A teacher using PLACHECK
observes a group of students at the end of each time in-
terval, counts the number of students engaged in the tar-
geted activity, and records the tally with the total number
of students in the group. For example, Doke and Risley
(1972) used data obtained by PLACHECK measurement
to compare group participation in required and optional
before-school activities. Observers tallied the number of
students in either the required or the optional activity area
at the end of 3-minute intervals, and then the number of
children actually participating in an activity in either area.
They reported these data as separate percentages of chil-
dren participating in required or optional activities.
Dyer, Schwartz, and Luce (1984) used a variation of
PLACHECK to measure the percentage of students with
disabilities living in a residential facility engaged in age-
appropriate and functional activities. As students entered
the observation area, they were observed individually for
as long as it took to determine the activity in which they
were engaged. The students were observed in a prede-
termined order not exceeding 10 seconds per student.
Other variations of the PLACHECK measurement
can be found in the literature, though they usually are
called time sampling or momentary time sampling. For
example, in a study examining the effects of response
cards on the disruptive behavior of third-graders during
daily math lessons, Armendariz and Umbreit (1999)
recorded at 1-minute intervals whether each student in
the class was being disruptive. By combining the
PLACHECK data obtained across all of the no-response
cards (baseline) sessions, and graphing those results as
the percentage of students who were disruptive at each 1-
minute mark, and doing the same with the PLACHEK
data from all response cards sessions. Armendariz and
Umbreit created a clear and powerful picture of the dif-
ferences in "group behavior" from the beginning to the
end of a typical lesson in which response cards were used
or not used.

Recognizing Artifactual Variability in Time
Sampling Measures
As stated previously, all time sampling methods provide
only an estimate of the actual occurrence of the behavior.
Different measurement sampling procedures produce dif-
ferent results, which can influence decisions and inter-
pretations. Figure 9 illustrates just how different the
results obtained by measuring the same behavior with
different time sampling methods can be. The shaded bars
indicate when the behavior was occurring within an ob-
servation period divided into 10 contiguous intervals. The
shaded bars reveal all three dimensional quantities of be-
havior: repeatability (seven instances of the behavior),
temporal extent (the duration of each response) and tem-
poral locus (interresponse time is depicted by the space
between the shaded bars).
Because the time sampling methods used in applied
behavior analysis are most often viewed and interpreted
as measures of the proportion of the total observation pe-
riod in which the behavior occurred, it is important to
compare the results of time sampling methods with those
obtained by continuous measurement of duration. Con-
tinuous measurement reveals that the behavior depicted
in Figure 9 occurred 55% of the time during the ob-
servation period. When the same behavior during the
same observation period was recorded using whole in-
terval recordings the measure obtained grossly underes-
timated the actual occurrence of the behavior (i.e., 30%
versus 55%), partial-interval recording grossly overesti-
mated the actual occurrence (i.e., 70% versus 55%), and
momentary time sampling yielded a fairly close estimate
of actual occurrence of the behavior (50% versus 55%).
The fact that momentary time sampling resulted in a
measure that most closely approximated the actual be-
havior does not mean that it is always the preferred
method. Different distributions of the behavior (i.e., tem-
poral locus) during the observation period, even at the
same overall frequency and duration as the session shown
in Figure 9, would result in widely different outcomes
from each of the three time sampling methods.
Discrepancies between measures obtained by differ-
ent measurement methods are usually described in terms
of the relative accuracy or inaccuracy of each method.
However, accuracy is not the issue here. If the shaded
bars in Figure 9 represent the true value of the behav-
ior, then each of the time sampling methods was con-
ducted with complete accuracy and the resulting data are
what should be obtained by applying each method. An
example of the inaccurate use of one of the measurement
methods would be if the observer using whole-interval
recording had marked the behavior as occurring in In-
terval 2, when the behavior did not occur according to
the rules of whole-interval recording
But if the behavior actually occurred for 55% of the
observation period, what should we call the wrong and
misleading measures of 30% and 70% if not inaccurate?
In this case, the misleading data are artifacts of the mea-
surement procedures used to obtain them. An artifact is
something that appears to exist because of the way it is
examined or measured. The 30% measure obtained by
whole-interval recording and the 70% measure obtained
by partial-interval recording are artifacts of the way those
measures were conducted. The fact that data obtained
from whole-interval and partial-interval recording con-
sistently underestimate and overestimate, respectively,
actual occurrence of behavior as measured by continuous
duration recording is an example of well-known artifacts.
It is clear that interval measurement and momentary
time sampling result in some artifactual variability in the
data, which must be considered carefully when interpre-
tating results obtained with these measurement methods.
Measuring Behavior
by Permanent Products
Behavior can be measured in real time by observing a
person's actions and recording responses of interest as
they occur. For example, a teacher can keep a tally of the
number of times a student raises her hand during a class
discussion. Some behaviors can be measured in real time
by recording their effects on the environment as those ef-
fects are produced. For example, a hitting instructor ad-
vances a handheld counter each time a batter hits a pitch
to the right-field side of second base.
Some behaviors can be measured after they have oc-
curred. A behavior that produces consistent effects on
the environment can be measured after it has occurred if
the effects, or products left behind by the behavior, re-
main unaltered until measurement is conducted. For ex-
ample, if the flight of the baseballs hit by a batter during
batting practice were not impeded, and the balls were left
lying on the ground, a hitting instructor could collect data
on the batter's performance after the batter's turn was
completed by counting each ball found lying in fair ter-
ritory on the right-field side of second base.
Measuring behavior after it has occurred by measur-
ing the effects that the behavior produced on the environ-
ment is known as measurement by permanent product.
Measuring permanent products is an ex post facto method
of data collection because measurement takes place after
the behavior has occurred. A permanent product is a
change in the environment produced by a behavior that
lasts long enough for measurement to take place.
Although often described erroneously as a method
for measuring behavior, measurement by permanent
product does not refer to any particular measurement
procedure or method. Instead, measurement by perma-
nent product refers to the time of measurement (i.e., after
the behavior has occurred) and the medium (i.e., the ef-
fect of the behavior, not the behavior itself) by which the
measurer comes in contact with (i.e., observes) the be-
havior. All of the methods for measuring behavior de-
scribed in this chapter-event recording, timing, and time
sampling-can be applied to the measurement of per-
manent products.
Permanent products can be natural or contrived out-
comes of the behavior. Permanent products are natural
and important outcomes of a wide range of socially sig-
nificant behaviors in educational, vocational, domestic,
and community environments. Examples in education in-
clude compositions written (Dorow & Boyle, 1998), com-
putations of math problems written (Skinner, Fletcher,
Wildmon, & Belfiore, 1996), spelling words written
(McGuffin, Martz, & Heron, 1997), worksheets com-
pleted (Alber, Heward, & Hippler, 1999), homework as-
signments turned in (Alber, Nelson, & Brennan, 2002),
and test questions answered (e.g., Gardner, Heward, &
Grossi, 1994). Behaviors such as mopping floors and
dishwashing (Grossi & Heward, 1998), incontinence (Ad-
kins & Matthews, 1997), drawing bathroom graffiti
(Mueller, Moore, Doggett, & Tingstrom, 2000), recycling
(Brothers, Krantz, & McClannahan, 1994), and picking
up litter (Powers, Osborne, & Anderson, 1973) can also
be measured by the natural and important changes they
make on the environment.
Many socially significant behaviors have no direct
effects on the physical environment. Reading orally, sit-
ting with good posture, and repetitive hand flapping leave
no natural products in typical environments. Neverthe-
less, ex post facto measurement of such behaviors can
often be accomplished via contrived permanent products.
For example, by audiotaping students as they read out
loud (Eckert, Ardoin, Daly, & Martens, 2002), videotap-
ing a girl sitting in class (Schwarz & Hawkins, 1970), and
videotaping a boy flapping his hands (Ahearn, Clark, Gar-
denier, Chung, & Dube, 2003) researchers obtained con-
trived permanent products for measuring these behaviors.
Contrived permanent products are sometimes useful
in measuring behaviors that have natural permanent prod-
ucts that are only temporary. For example, Goetz and
Baer (1973) measured variations in the form of children's
block building from photographs taken of the construc-
tions made by the children, and Twohig and Woods
(2001) measured the length of fingernails from pho-
tographs of nail-biters' hands.
Advantages of Measurement
by Permanent Product
Measurement by permanent product offers numerous ad-
vantages to practitioners and researchers.
Practitioner Is Free to Do Other Tasks
Not having to observe and record behavior as it occurs en-
ables the practitioner to do something else during the ob-
servation period. For example, a teacher who uses an
audiotape recorder to record students' questions, com-
ments, and talk-outs during a class discussion can con-
centrate on what her students are saying, provide
individual help, and so on.
Makes Possible Measurement of Some
Behaviors That Occur at Inconvenient
or Inaccessible Times and Places
Many socially significant behaviors occur at times and
places that are inconvenient or inaccessible to the re-
searcher or practitioner. Measuring permanent products
is indicated when observing the target behavior as it oc-
curs would be difficult because the behavior occurs in-
frequently, in various environments, or for extended
periods of time. For example, a music teacher can have
his guitar student make audio recordings of portions of his
daily practice sessions at home.
Measurement May Be More Accurate,
Complete, and Continuous
Although measuring behavior as it occurs provides the
most immediate access to the data, it does not necessar-
ily yield the most accurate, complete, and representative
data. An observer measuring behavior from permanent
products can take his time, rescore the worksheet, or lis-
ten to and watch the videotape again. Videotape enables
the observer to slow down, pause, and repeat portions of
the session—to literally "hold still" the behavior so it can
be examined and measured again and again if necessary.
The observer might see or hear additional nuances and as-
pects of the behavior, or other behaviors that she over-
looked or missed altogether during live performances.
Measurement by permanent product enables data
collection on more participants. An observer can look at
a videotape once and measure one participant's behav-
ior, then replay the tape and measure a second partici-
pant's behavior.
Video- or audiotaping behavior provides data on the
occurrence of all instances of a target behavior (Mil-
tenberger, Rapp, & Long, 1999; Tapp & Walden, 2000).
Having this permanent product of all instances of the be-
havior lends itself to later scoring by using the built-in
calibrated digital timer (e.g., on a VCR), set to zero sec-
onds (or the first frame) at the beginning of the session,
to note the exact time of behavior onset and offset. Fur-
ther, software programs facilitate data collection and
analysis based on exact timings. PROCORDER is a soft-
ware system for facilitating the collection and analysis
of videotaped behavior. According to Miltenberger and
colleagues, "With a recording of the exact time of the
onset and offset of the target behavior in the observation
session, we are able to report the frequency (or rate) or the
duration of the behavior" (p. 119).'°
Facilitates Data Collection for Interobserver
Agreement and Treatment Integrity
Video- or audiotapes assist with data collection tasks such
as obtaining interobserver agreement data and assessing
treatment integrity. Permanent products of behaviors
make possible the repeated measurement of behaviors,
eliminating the need to bring multiple observers into the
research or treatment setting.
Enables Measurement of Complex Behaviors
and Multiple Response Classes
Permanent products, especially videotaped records of be-
havior, afford the opportunity to measure complex be-
haviors and multiple response classes in busy social
environments. Schwarz and Hawkins (1970) obtained
measures of the posture, voice volume, and face touch-
ing of an elementary student from videotapes taken dur-
ing two class periods. The three behaviors were targeted
as the result of operationalizing the girl's "poor self-
esteem." The researchers were able to view the tapes re-
peatedly and score them for different behaviors. In this
study, the girl also watched and evaluated her behavior on
the videotapes as part of the intervention.
Figure 10 shows an example of a recording form
used by Silvestri (2004) to measure three types of state-
ments by teachers-generic positive, specific positive,
and negative—-from audiotapes of classroom lessons.
(See Figure 3.7 for definitions of these behaviors.) The
movement, multiple voices, and general commotion that
characterize any classrooms would combine to make it
very difficult, if not impossible, for a live observer to con-
sistently detect and accurately record these behaviors.
Each teacher participant in the study wore a small wire-
less microphone that transmitted a signal to a receiver
that was connected to a cassette tape recorder.
Determining Whether
Measurement by Permanent
Product Is Appropriate
The advantages of measurement by permanent product
are considerable, and it may seem as though permanent
product measurement is always preferable to real-time
measurement. Answering the following four questions
will help practitioners and researchers determine whether
measurement by permanent product is appropriate: Is
real-time measurement needed? Can the behavior be mea-
sured by permanent product? Will obtaining a contrived
permanent product unduly affect the behavior? and How
much will it cost?
Is Real-Time Measurement Needed?
Data-based decision making about treatment procedures
and experimental conditions is a defining feature of ap-
plied behavior analysis and one of its major strengths.
Data-based decision making requires more than direct
and frequent measurement of behavior; it also requires
ongoing and timely access to the data those measures
provide. Measuring behavior as it occurs provides the
most immediate access to the data. Although real-time
measurement by permanent product can be conducted in
some situations (e.g., counting each batted ball that lands
to the right of second base as a hitter takes batting prac-
tice), measurement by permanent product will most often
be conducted after the instructional or experimental ses-
sion has ended.
Measures taken from video- or audiotapes cannot be
obtained until the tapes are viewed after a session has
ended. If treatment decisions are being made on a session-
by-session basis, this behavior-to-measurement delay
poses no problem as long as the data can be obtained
from the tapes prior to the next session. However, when
moment-to-moment treatment decisions must be made
according to the participant's behavior during the ses-
sion, real-time measurement is necessary. Consider a be-
havior analyst trying to reduce the rate of a person's
self-injurious behavior (SIB) by providing access to a
preferred stimulus contingent on increasing durations of
time without SIB. Accurate implementation of the treat-
ment protocol would require the real-time measurement
of interresponse times (IRT).
Can the Behavior Be Measured
by Permanent Product?
Not all behaviors are suitable for measurement by per-
manent product. Some behaviors affect fairly permanent
changes in the environment that are not reliable for the
purposes of measurement. For example, self-injurious
behavior (SIB) often produces long-lasting effects
(bruises, welts, and even torn and bleeding skin) that
could be measured after the occurrence of the behavior.
But accurate measures of SIB could not be obtained by
examining the client's body on a regular basis. The pres-
ence of discolored skin, abrasions, and other such marks
would indicate that the person had been injured, but many
important questions would be left unanswered. How
many times did SIB occur? Were there acts of SIB that
did not leave observable marks on the skin? Was each in-
stance of tissue damage the result of SIB? These are im-
portant questions for evaluating the effects of any
treatment. Yet, they could not be answered with certainty
because these permanent products are not precise enough
for the measurement of the SIB. Behaviors suitable for
measurement via permanent product must meet two rules.
Rule 1: Each occurrence of the target behavior
must produce the same permanent product. The perma-
nent product must be a result of every instance of the
response class measured. All topographical variants of
the target behavior and all responses of varying magni-
tude that meet the definition of target behavior must
produce the same permanent product. Measuring an
employee's work productivity by counting the number
of correctly assembled widgets in his "completed
work" bin conforms to this rule. An occurrence of the
target behavior in this case is defined functionally as a
correctly assembled widget. Measuring SIB by marks
on the skin does not meet Rule 1 because some SIB re-
sponses will not leave discernable marks.
Rule 2: The permanent product can only be pro-
duced by the target behavior. This rule requires that the
permanent product cannot result from (a) any behaviors
by the participant other than the target behavior or (b)
the behavior of any person other than the participant.
Using the number of correctly assembled widgets in the
employee's "completed work" bin to measure his pro-
ductivity conforms to Rule 2 if the observer can be as-
sured that (a) the employee put no widgets in his bin
that he did not assemble and (b) none of the assembled
widgets in the employee's bin were put there by anyone
other than the employee. Using marks on the skin as a
permanent product for measuring self-injurious behav-
ior also fails to meet Rule 2. Marks on the skin could be
produced by other behaviors by the person (e.g., run-
ning too fast, which caused him to trip and hit his head,
stepping in poison ivy) or by the behavior of other peo-
ple (e.g., struck by another person).
Will Obtaining a Contrived Permanent
Product Unduly Affect the Behavior?
Practitioners and researchers should always consider re-
activity-the effects of the measurement procedure on
the behavior being measured. Reactivity is most likely
when observation and measurement procedures are ob-
trusive. Obtrusive measurement alters the environment,
which may in turn affect the behavior being measured.
Permanent products obtained using recording equipment,
the presence of which may cause a person to behave dif-
ferently, are called contrived permanent products. For ex-
ample, using an audiotape to record conversations might
encourage the participant to talk less or more. But it
should be recognized that reactivity to the presence of
human observers is a common phenomenon, and reac-
tive effects are usually temporary (e.g., Haynes & Horn,
1982; Kazdin, 1982, 2001). Even so, it is appropriate to
anticipate the influence that equipment may have on the
target behavior.
How Much Will It Cost to Obtain and Measure
the Permanent Product?
The final issues to address in determining the appropri-
ateness of measuring a target behavior by permanent
product are availability, cost, and effort. If recording
equipment is required to obtain a contrived product of
the behavior, is it currently available? If not, how much
will it cost to buy or rent the equipment? How much time
will it take to learn to use the equipment initially? How
difficult and time-consuming will it be to set up, store,
and use the equipment for the duration of the study or
behavior change program?
Computer-Assisted
Measurement of Behavior
Computer hardware and software systems for behavioral
measurement and data analysis have become increasingly
sophisticated and useful, especially for applied re-
searchers. Developers have produced data collection and
analysis software for observational measurement using
laptops (Kahng & Iwata, 2000; Repp & Karsh, 1994),
handheld computers (Saudargas & Bunn, 1989), or per-
sonal digital assistants (Emerson, Reever, & Felce, 2000).
Some systems use bar-code scanners for data collection
(e.g., McEntee & Saunders, 1997; Saunders, Saunders, &
Saunders, 1994; Tapp & Wehby, 2000). Most computer
software systems require a DOS or Windows operating
system. A few software systems have been developed for
the Mac OS. Regardless of the computer operating sys-
tems, Kahng and Iwata (2000) stated:
These systems have the potential to facilitate the task of
observation by improving the reliability and accuracy of
recording relative to traditional but cumbersome meth-
ods based on paper and pencil and to improve the effi-
ciency of data calculation and graphing. (p. 35)
Developments in microchip technology have ad-
vanced the measurement and data analysis capabilities
of these systems, and have made the software increas-
ingly easier to learn and apply. Many of these semiauto-
mated systems can record a number of events, including
discrete trials, the number of responses per unit of time,
duration, latency, interresponse time (IRT), and fixed and
variable intervals for time-sampling measurement. These
systems can present data calculated as rate, duration, la-
tency, IRT, percentage of intervals, percentage of trials,
and conditional probabilities.
A distinct advantage of computer-based observation
and measurement systems is that when aggregating rates,
time-series analyses, conditional probabilities, sequen-
tial dependencies, interrelationships, and combinations
of events, these data can be clustered and analyzed. Be-
cause these systems allow for the simultaneous recording
of multiple behaviors across multiple dimensions, out-
puts can be examined and analyzed from different per-
spectives that would be difficult and time-consuming with
paper-and-pencil methods.
In addition to recording behavior and calculating
data, these systems provide analyses of interobserver
agreement (e.g., smaller/larger, overall, occurrence,
nonoccurrence) and measurement from audio and video
documents. The semiautomated computer-driven sys-
tems, as compared to the commonly used paper-and-
pencil data recording and analysis methods, have the
potential to improve interobserver agreements, the relia-
bility of observational measurements, and the efficiency
of data calculation (Kahng & Iwata, 1998)."'
The practical value derived from the greater effi-
ciency and ease of use of computer-assisted measure-
ment systems will likely increase their use by applied
researchers and practitioners who currently use me-
chanical counters, timers, and paper and pencil for ob-
servational recording.
Summary
Definition and Functions of Measurement in Applied
Behavior Analysis
1. Measurement is the process of applying quantitative labels
to observed properties of events using a standard set of rules.
2. Measurement is how scientists operationalize empiricism.
3. Without measurement, all three levels of scientific knowl-
edge— description, prediction, and control-would be rel-
egated to guesswork and subjective opinions.
4. Applied behavior analysts measure behavior to obtain an-
swers to questions about the existence and nature of func-
tional relations between socially significant behavior and
environmental variables.
5. Practitioners measure behavior before and after treatment
to evaluate the overall effects of interventions (summa-
tive evaluation) and frequent measures of behavior dur-
ing treatment (formative assessment) to guide decisions
concerning the continuation, modification, or termination
of treatment.
6. Without frequent measures of the behavior targeted for in-
tervention, practitioners may (a) continue an ineffective
treatment when no real behavior change occurred, or (b)
discontinue an effective treatment because subjective judg-
ment detects no improvement.
7. Measurement also helps practitioners optimize their ef-
fectiveness; verify the legitimacy of practices touted as
"evidence based"; identify treatments based on pseudo-
science, fad, fashion, or ideology; be accountable to
clients, consumers, employers, and society; and achieve
ethical standards.
Measureable Dimensions of Behavior
8. Because behavior occurs within and across time, it has three
dimensional quantities: repeatability (i.e., count), temporal
extent (i.e., duration), and temporal locus (i.e., when be-
havior occurs). These properties, alone and in combination,
provide the basic and derivative measures used by applied
behavior analysts. (See Figure 5 for a detailed summary.)
9. Count is the number of responses emitted during an ob-
servation period.
10. Rate, or frequency, is a ratio of count per observation pe-
riod; it is often expressed as count per standard unit of time.
11. Celeration is a measure of the change (acceleration or de-
celeration) in rate of responding per unit of time.
12. Duration is the amount of time in which behavior occurs.
13. Response latency is a measure of the elapsed time be-
tween the onset of a stimulus and the initiation of a sub-
sequent response.
14. Interresponse time (IRT) is the amount of time that elapses
between two consecutive instances of a response class.
15. Percentage, a ratio formed by combining the same dimen-
sional quantities, expresses the proportional quantity of an
event in terms of the number of times the event occurred
per 100 opportunities that the event could have occurred.
16. Trials-to-criterion is a measure of the number of response
opportunities needed to achieve a predetermined level of
performance.
17. Although form (i.e., topography) and intensity of re-
sponding (i.e., magnitude) are not fundamental dimen-
sional quantities of behavior, they are important
quantitative parameters for defining and verifying the oc-
currence of many response classes.
18. Topography refers to the physical form or shape of a be-
havior.
19. Magnitude refers to the force or intensity with which a re-
sponse is emitted.
Procedures for Measuring Behavior
20. Event recording encompasses a wide variety of procedures
for detecting and recording the number of times a behav-
ior of interest is observed.
21. A variety of timing devices and procedures are used to
measure duration, response latency, and interresponse time.
22. Time sampling refers to a variety of methods for observ-
ing and recording behavior during intervals or at specific
moments in time.
23. Observers using whole-interval recording divide the ob-
servation period into a series of equal time intervals. At
the end of each interval, they record whether the target be-
havior occurred throughout the entire interval.
24. Observers using partial-interval recording divide the ob-
servation period into a series of equal time intervals. At
the end of each interval, they record whether behavior
occurred at any point during the interval.
25. Observers using momentary time sampling divide the ob-
servation period into a series of time intervals. At the end
of each interval, they record whether the target behavior is
occurring at that specific moment.
26. Planned activity check (PLACHECK) is a variation of mo-
mentary time sampling in which the observer records
whether each individual in a group is engaged in the tar-
get behavior.
27. Measurement artifacts are common with time sampling.
Measuring Behavior by Permanent Products
28. Measuring behavior after it has occurred by measuring its
effects on the environment is known as measurement by
permanent product.
29. Measurement of many behaviors can be accomplished via
contrived permanent products.
30. Measurement by permanent product offers numerous ad-
vantages: The practitioner is free to do other tasks; it en-
ables the measurement of behaviors that occur at
inconvenient or inaccessible times and places; measure-
ment may be more accurate, complete, and continuous; it
facilitates the collection of interobserver agreement and
treatment integrity data; and it enables the measurement of
complex behaviors and multiple response classes.
31. If moment-to-moment treatment decisions must be made
during the session, measurement by permanent product
may not be warranted.
32. Behaviors suitable for measurement via permanent prod-
ucts must meet two rules. Rule 1: Each occurrence of the
target behavior must produce the same permanent product.
Rule 2: The permanent product can only be produced by
the target behavior.
Computer-Assisted Measurement of Behavior
33. Computer hardware and software systems for behavioral
measurement and data analysis have become increasingly
sophisticated and easier to use.
34. Developers have produced data collection and analysis
software for observational measurement using laptops,
handheld computers, personal digital assistants (PDAs),
and desktop computers.
35. Some systems allow for the simultaneous recording of
multiple behaviors across multiple dimensions. Outputs
can be examined and analyzed from different perspectives
that would be difficult and time-consuming with paper-
and-pencil methods.