A-B design A two-phase experimental design consisting of
a pre-treatment baseline condition (A) followed by a
treatment condition (B).
A-B-A design A three-phase experimental design consisting
of an initial baseline phase (A) until steady state respond-
ing (or countertherapeutic trend) is obtained, an interven-
tion phase in which the treatment condition (B) is
implemented until the behavior has changed and steady
state responding is obtained, and a return to baseline con-
ditions (A) by withdrawing the independent variable to
see whether responding "reverses" to levels observed in
the initial baseline phase. (See A-B-A-B design, reversal
design, withdrawal design.)
A-B-A-B design An experimental design consisting of (1) an
initial baseline phase (A) until steady state responding (or
countertherapeutic trend) is obtained, (2) an initial inter-
vention phase in which the treatment variable (B) is im-
plemented until the behavior has changed and steady state
responding is obtained, (3) a return to baseline conditions
(A) by withdrawing the independent variable to see
whether responding "reverses" to levels observed in the
initial baseline phase, and (4) a second intervention phase
(B) to see whether initial treatment effects are replicated
(also called reversal design, withdrawal design).
abative effect (of a motivating operation) A decrease in the
current frequency of behavior that has been reinforced by
the stimulus that is increased in reinforcing effectiveness
by the same motivating operation. For example, food in-
gestion abates (decreases the current frequency of) be-
havior that has been reinforced by food.
ABC recording See anecdotal observation.
abolishing operation (AO) A motivating operation that de-
creases the reinforcing effectiveness of a stimulus, object,
or event. For example, the reinforcing effectiveness of food
is abolished as a result of food ingestion.
accuracy (of measurement) The extent to which observed
values, the data produced by measuring an event, match the
true state, or true values, of the event as it exists in nature.
(See observed value and true value.)
adjunctive behavior Behavior that occurs as a collateral ef-
fect of a schedule of periodic reinforcement for other be-
havior; time-filling or interim activities (e.g., doodling,
idle talking, smoking, drinking) that are induced by sched-
ules of reinforcement during times when reinforcement is
unlikely to be delivered. Also called schedule-induced
behavior:
affirmation of the consequent A three-step form of reason-
ing that begins with a true antecedent-consequent (if-A-
then-B) statement and proceeds as follows: (1) If A is true,
then B is true; (2) B is found to be true; (3) therefore, A is
true. Although other factors could be responsible for the
truthfulness of A, a sound experiment affirms several if-A-
then-B possibilities, each one reducing the likelihood of
factors other than the independent variable being respon-
sible for the observed changes in behavior.
alternating treatments design An experimental design in
which two or more conditions (one of which may be a no-
treatment control condition) are presented in rapidly alter-
nating succession (e.g., on alternating sessions or days)
independent of the level of responding; differences in re-
sponding between or among conditions are attributed to the
effects of the conditions (also called concurrent schedule
design, multielement design, multiple schedule design).
alternative schedule Provides reinforcement whenever the
requirement of either a ratio schedule or an interval sched-
ule-the basic schedules that makeup the alternative
schedule—is met, regardless of which of the component
schedule's requirements is met first.
anecdotal observation A form of direct, continuous obser-
vation in which the observer records a descriptive, tem-
porally sequenced account of all behaviors) of interest
and the antecedent conditions and consequences for those
behaviors as those events occur in the client's natural en-
vironment (also called ABC recording).
antecedent An environmental condition or stimulus change
existing or occurring prior to a behavior of interest.
antecedent intervention A behavior change strategy that
manipulates contingency-independent antecedent stimuli
(motivating operations). (See noncontingent reinforce-
ment, high-probability request sequence, and functional
communication training. Contrast with antecedent con-
trol, a behavior change intervention that manipulates
contingency-dependent consequence events to affect stim-
ulus control.)
antecedent stimulus class A set of stimuli that share a com-
mon relationship. All stimuli in an antecedent stimulus
class evoke the same operant behavior, or elicit the same
respondent behavior: (See arbitrary stimulus class, fea-
ture stimulus class.)
applied behavior analysis (ABA) The science in which tac-
tics derived from the principles of behavior are applied to
improve socially significant behavior and experimentaton
is used to identify the variables responsible for the im-
provement in behavior.
arbitrary stimulus class Antecedent stimuli that evoke the
same response but do not resemble each other in physical
form or share a relational aspect such as bigger or under
(e.g., peanuts, cheese, coconut milk, and chicken breasts
are members of an arbitrary stimulus class if they evoke the
response "sources of protein"). (Compare to feature stim-
ulus class.)
artifact An outcome or result that appears to exist because of
the way it is measured but in fact does not correspond to
what actually occurred.
ascending baseline A data path that shows an increasing
trend in the response measure over time. (Compare with
descending baseline.)
audience Anyone who functions as a discriminative stimulus
evoking verbal behavior. Different audiences may control
different verbal behavior about the same topic because of
a differential reinforcement history. Teens may describe
the same event in different ways when talking to peers ver-
sus parents.
autoclitic A secondary verbal operant in which some aspect
of a speaker's own verbal behavior functions as an S" or
an MO for additional speaker verbal behavior. The auto-
clitic relation can be thought of as verbal behavior about
verbal behavior.
automatic punishment Punishment that occurs independent
of the social mediation by others (i.e., a response product
serves as a punisher independent of the social environ-
ment).
automatic reinforcement Reinforcement that occurs inde-
pendent of the social mediation of others (e.g., scratching
an insect bite relieves the itch).
automaticity (of reinforcement) Refers to the fact that be-
havior is modified by its consequences irrespective of the
person's awareness; a person does not have to recognize or
verbalize the relation between her behavior and a rein-
forcing consequence, or even know that a consequence
has occurred, for reinforcement to "work." (Contrast with
automatic reinforcement.)
aversive stimulus In general, an unpleasant or noxious stim-
ulus; more technically, a stimulus change or condition that
functions (a) to evoke a behavior that has terminated it in
the past; (b) as a punisher when presented following be-
havior, and/or (c) as a reinforcer when withdrawn follow-
ing behavior.
avoidance contingency A contingency in which a response
prevents or postpones the presentation of a stimulus.
(Compare with escape contingency.)
B-A-B design A three-phase experimental design that begins
with the treatment condition. After steady state respond-
ing has been obtained during the initial treatment phase
(B), the treatment variable is withdrawn (A) to see whether
responding changes in the absence of the independent vari-
able. The treatment variable is then reintroduced (B) in an
attempt to recapture the level of responding obtained dur-
ing the first treatment phase.
backup reinforcers Tangible objects, activities, or privileges
that serve as reinforcers and that can be purchased with
tokens.
backward chaining A teaching procedure in which a
trainer completes all but the last behavior in a chain,
which is performed by the learner, who then receives re-
inforcement for completing the chain. When the learner
shows competence in performing the final step in the
chain, the trainer performs all but the last two behaviors
in the chain, the learner emits the final two steps to com-
plete the chain, and reinforcement is delivered. This se-
quence is continued until the learner completes the entire
chain independently.
backward chaining with leaps ahead A backward chain-
ing procedure in which some steps in the task analysis are
skipped; used to increase the efficiency of teaching long
behavior chains when there is evidence that the skipped
steps are in the learner's repertoire.
bar graph A simple and versatile graphic format for sum-
marizing behavioral data; shares most of the line graph's
features except that it does not have distinct data points
representing successive response measures through time.
Also called a fistogram.
baseline A condition of an experiment in which the inde-
pendent variable is not present; data obtained during base-
line are the basis for determining the effects of the
independent variable; a control condition that does not
necessarily mean the absence of instruction or treatment,
only the absence of a specific independent variable of ex-
perimental interest.
baseline logic A term sometimes used to refer to the exper-
imental reasoning inherent in single-subject experimental
designs; entails three elements: prediction, verification,
and replication. (See steady state strategy.)
behavior The activity of living organisms; human behavior
includes everything that people do. A technical definition:
"that portion of an organism's interaction with its envi-
ronment that is characterized by detectable displacement
in space through time of some part of the organism and
that results in a measurable change in at least one aspect
of the environment" (Johnston & Pennypacker, 1993a,
p. 23). (See operant behavior, respondent behavior, re-
sponse, response class.)
behavior-altering effect (of a motivating operation) An
alteration in the current frequency of behavior that has
been reinforced by the stimulus that is altered in effec-
tiveness by the same motivating operation. For example,
the frequency of behavior that has been reinforced with
food is increased or decreased by food deprivation or food
ingestion.
behavior chain A sequence of responses in which each re-
sponse produces a stimulus change that functions as con-
ditioned reinforcement for that response and as a
discriminative stimulus for the next response in the chain;
reinforcement for the last response in a chain maintains
the reinforcing effectiveness of the stimulus changes pro-
duced by all previous responses in the chain.
behavior chain interruption strategy An intervention that
relies on the participant's skill in performing the critical el-
ements of a chain independently; the chain is interrupted
occasionally so that another behavior can be emitted.
behavior chain with a limited hold A contingency that spec-
ifies a time interval by which a behavior chain must be
completed for reinforcement to be delivered
behavior change tactic A technologically consistent method
for changing behavior derived from one or more princi-
ples of behavior (e.g., differential reinforcement of other
behavior, response cost); possesses sufficient generality
across subjects, settings, and/or behaviors to warrant its
codification and dissemination.
behavior checklist A checklist that provides descriptions of
specific skills (usually in hierarchical order) and the con-
ditions under which each skill should be observed. Some
checklists are designed to assess one particular behavior or
skill area. Others address multiple behaviors or skill areas.
Most use a Likert scale to rate responses.
behavior trap An interrelated community of contingen-
cies of reinforcement that can be especially powerful,
producing substantial and long-lasting behavior changes.
Effective behavior traps share four essential features:
(a) They are "baited" with virtually irresistible rein-
forcers that "lure" the student to the trap: (b) only a low-
effort response already in the student's repertoire is
necessary to enter the trap: (c) once inside the trap, in-
terrelated contingencies of reinforcement motivate the
student to acquire, extend, and maintain targeted aca-
demic and/or social skills; and (d) they can remain ef-
fective for a long time because students shows few, if
any, satiation effects.
behavioral assessment A form of assessment that involves
a full range of inquiry methods (observation, interview,
testing, and the systematic manipulation of antecedent or
consequence variables) to identify probable antecedent
and consequent controlling variables. Behavioral assess-
ment is designed to discover resources, assets, significant
others, competing contingencies, maintenance and gener-
ality factors, and possible reinforcer and/or punishers that
surround the potential target behavior.
behavioral contract See contingency contract.
behavioral contrast The phenomenon in which a change in
one component of a multiple schedule that increases or
decreases the rate of responding on that component is ac-
companied by a change in the response rate in the oppo-
site direction on the other, unaltered component of the
schedule.
behavioral cusp A behavior that has sudden and dramatic
consequences that extend well beyond the idiosyncratic
change itself because it exposes the person to new envi-
ronments, reinforcers, contingencies, responses, and stim-
ulus controls. (See pivotal behavior.)
behavioral momentum A metaphor to describe a rate of re-
sponding and its resistance to change following an alter-
ation in reinforcement conditions. The momentum metaphor
has also been used to describe the effects produced by the
high-probability (high-p) request sequence.
behaviorism The philosophy of a science of behavior; there
are various forms of behaviorism. (See methodological
behaviorism, radical behaviorism.)
believability The extent to which the researcher convinces
herself and others that the data are trustworthy and de-
serve interpretation. Measures of interobserver agreement
(JOA) are the most often used index of believability in ap-
plied behavior analysis. (See interobserver agreement
(IOA).)
bonus response cost A procedure for implementing response
cost in which the person is provided a reservoir of rein-
forcers that are removed in predetermined amounts con-
tingent on the occurrence of the target behavior.
calibration Any procedure used to evaluate the accuracy of
a measurement system and, when sources of error are
found, to use that information to correct or improve the
measurement system.
celeration The change (acceleration or deceleration) in rate
of responding over time; based on count per unit of time
(rate); expressed as a factor by which responding is ac-
celerating or decelerating (multiplying or dividing); dis-
played with a trend line on a Standard Celeration Chart.
Celeration is a generic term without specific reference to
accelerating or decelerating rates of response. (See
Standard Celeration Chart.)
celeration time period A unit of time (e.g., per week, per
month) in which celeration is plotted on a Standard Cel-
eration Chart. (See celeration and celeration trend line.)
celeration trend line The celeration trend line is measured
as a factor by which rate multiplies or divides across the
celeration time periods (e.g., rate per week, rate per month,
rate per year, and rate per decade). (See celeration.)
chained schedule A schedule of reinforcement in which the
response requirements of two or more basic schedules
must be met in a specific sequence before reinforcement
is delivered; a discriminative stimulus is correlated with
each component of the schedule.
chaining Various procedures for teaching behavior chains.
(See backward chaining, backward chaining with
leaps ahead, behavior chain, forward chaining.)
changing criterion design An experimental design in which
an initial baseline phase is followed by a series of treatment
phases consisting of successive and gradually changing
criteria for reinforcement or punishment. Experimental
control is evidenced by the extent the level of responding
changes to conform to each new criterion.
clicker training A term popularized by Pryor (1999) for
shaping behavior using conditioned reinforcement in the
form of an auditory stimulus. A handheld device produces
a click sound when pressed. The trainer pairs other forms
of reinforcement (e.g., edible treats) with the click sound
so that the sound becomes a conditioned reinforcer.
component analysis Any experiment designed to identify
the active elements of a treatment condition, the relative
contributions of different variables in a treatment pack-
age, and/or the necessary and sufficient components of an
intervention. Component analyses take many forms, but
the basic strategy is to compare levels of responding across
successive phases in which the intervention is implemented
with one or more components left out.
compound schedule A schedule of reinforcement consist-
ing of two or more elements of continuous reinforcement
(CRF), the four intermittent schedules of reinforcement
(FR, VR, FI, VI), differential reinforcement of various
rates of responding (DRH, DRL), and extinction. The el-
ements from these basic schedules can occur successively
or simultaneously and with or without discriminative stim-
uli; reinforcement may be contingent on meeting the re-
quirements of each element of the schedule independently
or in combination with all elements.
concept formation A complex example of stimulus control
that requires stimulus generalization within a class of stim-
uli and discrimination between classes of stimuli.
concurrent schedule (conc) A schedule of reinforcement in
which two or more contingencies of reinforcement (ele-
ments) operate independently and simultaneously for two
or more behaviors.
conditional probability The likelihood that a target behav-
ior will occur in a given circumstance; computed by cal-
culating (a) the proportion of occurrences of behavior that
were preceded by a specific antecedent variable and
(b) the proportion of occurrences of problem behavior that
were followed by a specific consequence. Conditional
probabilities range from 0.0 to 1.0; the closer the condi-
tional probability is to 1.0, the stronger the relationship is
between the target behavior and the antecedent/conse-
quence variable.
conditioned motivating operation (CMO) A motivating op-
eration whose value-altering effect depends on a learning
history. For example, because of the relation between
locked doors and keys, having to open a locked door is a
CMO that makes keys more effective as reinforcers, and
evokes behavior that has obtained such keys.
conditioned negative reinforcer A previously neutral stim-
ulus change that functions as a negative reinforcer because
of prior pairing with one or more negative reinforcers. (See
negative reinforcer; compare with unconditioned neg-
ative reinforcer).
conditioned punisher A previously neutral stimulus
change that functions as a punisher because of prior pair-
ing with one or more other punishers; sometimes called
secondary or learned punisher. (Compare with uncon-
ditioned punisher.)
conditioned reflex A learned stimulus-response functional
relation consisting of an antecedent stimulus (e.g., sound
of refrigerator door opening) and the response it elicits
(e.g., salivation); each person's repertoire of conditioned
reflexes is the product of his or her history of interactions
with the environment (ontogeny). (See respondent con-
ditioning, unconditioned reflex.)
conditioned reinforcer A stimulus change that functions
as a reinforcer because of prior pairing with one or more
other reinforcers; sometimes called secondary or learned
reinforcer.
conditioned stimulus (CS) The stimulus component of a con-
ditioned reflex; a formerly neutral stimulus change that
elicits respondent behavior only after it has been paired
with an unconditioned stimulus (US) or another CS.
confidentiality Describes a situation of trust insofar as any in-
formation regarding a person receiving or having received
services may not be discussed with or otherwise made
available to another person or group, unless that person
has provided explicit authorization for release of such
information.
conflict of interest A situation in which a person in a position
of responsibility or trust has competing professional or
personal interests that make it difficult to fulfill his or her
duties impartially.
confounding variable An uncontrolled factor known or sus-
pected to exert influence on the dependent variable.
consequence A stimulus change that follows a behavior of in-
terest. Some consequences, especially those that are im-
mediate and relevant to current motivational states, have
significant influence on future behavior; others have little
effect. (See punisher, reinforcer.)
contingency Refers to dependent and/or temporal relations
between operant behavior and its controlling variables.
(See contingent, three-term contingency.)
contingency contract A mutually agreed upon document be-
tween parties (e.g., parent and child) that specifies a con-
tingent relationship between the completion of specified
behavior(s) and access to specified reinforcer(s).
contingency reversal Exchanging the reinforcement contin-
gencies for two topographically different responses. For
example, if Behavior A results in reinforcement on an FR 1
schedule of reinforcement and Behavior B results in rein-
forcement being withheld (extinction), a contingency re-
versal consists of changing the contingencies such that
Behavior A now results in extinction and Behavior B re-
sults in reinforcement on an FR 1 schedule.
contingent Describes reinforcement (or punishment) that is
delivered only after the target behavior has occurred.
contingent observation A procedure for implementing time-
out in which the person is repositioned within an existing
setting such that observation of ongoing activities remains,
but access to reinforcement is lost.
continuous measurement Measurement conducted in a man-
ner such that all instances of the response class(es) of in-
terest are detected during the observation period.
continuous reinforcement (CRF) A schedule of reinforce-
ment that provides reinforcement for each occurrence of
the target behavior.
contrived contingency Any contingency of reinforcement
(or punishment) designed and implemented by a behavior
analyst or practitioner to achieve the acquisition, mainte-
nance, and/or generalization of a targeted behavior change.
(Contrast with naturally existing contingency.)
contrived mediating stimulus Any stimulus made functional
for the target behavior in the instructional setting that later
prompts or aids the learner in performing the target be-
havior in a generalization setting.
copying a text An elementary verbal operant that is evoked
by a nonvocal verbal discriminative stimulus that has
point-to-point correspondence and formal similarity with
the controlling response.
count A simple tally of the number of occurrences of a be-
havior. The observation period, or counting time, should
always be noted when reporting count measures.
counting time The period of time in which a count of the
number of responses emitted was recorded.
cumulative record A type of graph on which the cumula-
tive number of responses emitted is represented on the ver-
tical axis; the steeper the slope of the data path, the greater
the response rate.
cumulative recorder A device that automatically draws cu-
mulative records (graphs) that show the rate of response in
real time; each time a response is emitted, a pen moves
upward across paper that continuously moves at a con-
stant speed.
data The results of measurement, usually in quantifiable
form; in applied behavior analysis, it refers to measures
of some quantifiable dimension of a behavior.
data path The level and trend of behavior between succes-
sive data points; created by drawing a straight line from the
center of each data point in a given data set to the center
of the next data point in the same set.
delayed multiple baseline design A variation of the multi-
ple baseline design in which an initial baseline, and per-
haps intervention, are begun for one behavior (or setting,
or subject), and subsequent baselines for additional be-
haviors are begun in a staggered or delayed fashion.
dependent group contingency A contingency in which re-
inforcement for all members of a group is dependent on the
behavior of one member of the group or the behavior of a
select group of members within the larger group.
dependent variable The variable in an experiment measured to
determine if it changes as a result of manipulations of the
independent variable; in applied behavior analysis, it repre-
sents some measure of a socially significant behavior. (See
target behavior; compare with independent variable.)
deprivation The state of an organism with respect to how
much time has elapsed since it has consumed or contacted
a particular type of reinforcer; also refers to a procedure
for increasing the effectiveness of a reinforcer (e.g., with-
holding a person's access to a reinforcer for a specified
period of time prior to a session). (See motivating oper-
ation; contrast with satiation.)
descending baseline A data path that shows a decreasing
trend in the response measure over time. (Compare with
ascending baseline.)
descriptive functional behavior assessment Direct obser-
vation of problem behavior and the antecedent and con-
sequent events under naturally occurring conditions.
determinism The assumption that the universe is a lawful
and orderly place in which phenomena occur in relation to
other events and not in a willy-nilly, accidental fashion.
differential reinforcement Reinforcing only those responses
within a response class that meet a specific criterion along
some dimension(s) (i.e., frequency, topography, duration,
latency, or magnitude) and placing all other responses in
the class on extinction. (See differential reinforcement of
alternative behavior, differential reinforcement of in-
compatible behavior, differential reinforcement of
other behavior, discrimination training, shaping.)
differential reinforcement of alternative behavior (DRA)
A procedure for decreasing problem behavior in which re-
inforcement is delivered for a behavior that serves as a de-
sirable alternative to the behavior targeted for reduction
and withheld following instances of the problem behavior
(e.g., reinforcing completion of academic worksheet items
when the behavior targeted for reduction is talk-outs).
differential reinforcement of diminishing rates (DRD) A
schedule of reinforcement in which reinforcement is pro-
vided at the end of a predetermined interval contingent on
the number of responses emitted during the interval being
fewer than a gradually decreasing criterion based on the in-
dividual's performance in previous intervals (e.g., fewer
than five responses per 5 minutes, fewer than four
responses per 5 minutes, fewer than three responses per
5 minutes).
differential reinforcement of high rates (DRH) A sched-
ule of reinforcement in which reinforcement is provided
at the end of a predetermined interval contingent on the
number of responses emitted during the interval being
greater than a gradually increasing criterion based on the
individual's performance in previous intervals (e.g., more
than three responses per 5 minutes, more than five re-
sponses per 5 minutes, more than eight responses per
5 minutes).
differential reinforcement of incompatible behavior (DRI)
A procedure for decreasing problem behavior in which re-
inforcement is delivered for a behavior that is topograph-
ically incompatible with the behavior targeted for
reduction and withheld following instances of the prob-
lem behavior (e.g., sitting in seat is incompatible with
walking around the room).
differential reinforcement of low rates (DRL) A schedule
of reinforcement in which reinforcement (a) follows each
occurrence of the target behavior that is separated from
the previous response by a minimum interresponse time
(IRT), or (b) is contingent on the number of responses
within a period of time not exceeding a predetermined cri-
terion. Practitioners use DRL schedules to decrease the
rate of behaviors that occur too frequently but should be
maintained in the learner's repertoire. (See full-session
DRL, interval DRL, and spaced-responding DRL.)
differential reinforcement of other behavior (DRO) A pro-
cedure for decreasing problem behavior in which rein-
forcement is contingent on the absence of the problem
behavior during or at specific times (i.e., momentary DRO);
sometimes called differential reinforcement of zero rates
of responding or omission training). (See fixed-interval
DRO, fixed-momentary DRO, variable-interval DRO,
and variable-momentary DRO.)
direct measurement Occurs when the behavior that is mea-
sured is the same as the behavior that is the focus of the in-
vestigation. (Contrast with indirect measurement.)
direct replication An experiment in which the researcher
attempts to duplicate exactly the conditions of an earlier
experiment.
discontinuous measurement Measurement conducted in a
manner such that some instances of the response class(es)
of interest may not be detected.
discrete trial Any operant whose response rate is controlled
by a given opportunity to emit the response. Each discrete re-
sponse occurs when an opportunity to respond exists.
Discrete trial, restricted operant, and controlled operant are
synonymous technical terms. (Contrast with free operant.)
discriminated avoidance A contingency in which respond-
ing in the presence of a signal prevents the onset of a stim-
ulus from which escape is a reinforcer (See also
discriminative stimulus, discriminated operant, free-
operant avoidance, and stimulus control.)
discriminated operant An operant that occurs more fre-
quently under some antecedent conditions than under oth-
ers. (See discriminative stimulus [S"], stimulus control.)
discriminative stimulus (S") A stimulus in the presence of
which responses of some type have been reinforced and in
the absence of which the same type of responses have oc-
curred and not been reinforced; this history of differential
reinforcement is the reason an S® increases the momentary
frequency of the behavior. (See differential reinforce-
ment, stimulus control, stimulus discrimination train-
ing, and stimulus delta [S*].)
double-blind control A procedure that prevents the subject
and the observer(s) from detecting the presence or absence
of the treatment variable; used to eliminate confounding of
results by subject expectations, parent and teacher expec-
tations, differential treatment by others, and observer bias.
(See placebo control.)
DRI/DRA reversal technique An experimental technique
that demonstrates the effects of reinforcement; it uses dif-
ferential reinforcement of an incompatible or alternative
behavior (DRI/DRA) as a control condition instead of a
no-reinforcement (baseline) condition. During the DRI/
DRA condition, the stimulus change used as reinforce-
ment in the reinforcement condition is presented contin-
gent on occurrences of a specified behavior that is either
incompatible with the target behavior or an alternative to
the target behavior. A higher level of responding during
the reinforcement condition than during the DRI/DRA
condition demonstrates that the changes in behavior are
the result of contingent reinforcement, not simply the pre-
sentation of or contact with the stimulus event. (Compare
with DRO reversal technique and noncontingent rein-
forcement (NCR) reversal technique.)
DRO reversal technique An experimental technique for
demonstrating the effects of reinforcement by using dif-
ferential reinforcement of other behavior (DRO) as a con-
trol condition instead of a no-reinforcement (baseline)
condition. During the DRO condition, the stimulus
change used as reinforcement in the reinforcement con-
dition is presented contingent on the absence of the tar-
get behavior for a specified time period. A higher level
of responding during the reinforcement condition than
during the DRO condition demonstrates that the changes
in behavior are the result of contingent reinforcement,
not simply the presentation of or contact with the stim-
ulus event. (Compare with DRI/DRA reversal tech-
nique and noncontingent reinforcement (NCR)
reversal technique.)
duration A measure of the total extent of time in which a
behavior occurs.
echoic An elementary verbal operant involving a response
that is evoked by a verbal discriminative stimulus that has
point-to-point correspondence and formal similarity with
the response.
ecological assessment An assessment protocol that ac-
knowledges complex interrelationships between envi-
ronment and behavior. An ecological assessment is
a method for obtaining data across multiple settings and
persons.
empiricism The objective observation of the phenomena of
interest; objective observations are "independent of the in-
dividual prejudices, tastes, and private opinions of the sci-
entist. ... Results of empirical methods are objective in
that they are open to anyone's observation and do not de-
pend on the subjective belief of the individual scientist"
(Zuriff, 1985, p. 9).
environment The conglomerate of real circumstances in
which the organism or referenced part of the organism ex-
ists; behavior cannot occur in the absence of environment.
escape contingency A contingency in which a response ter-
minates (produces escape from) an ongoing stimulus.
(Compare with avoidance contingency.)
escape extinction Behaviors maintained with negative rein-
forcement are placed on escape extinction when those be-
haviors are not followed by termination of the aversive
stimulus; emitting the target behavior does not enable the
person to escape the aversive situation.
establishing operation (EO) A motivating operation that
establishes (increases) the effectiveness of some stimu-
lus, object, or event as a reinforcer. For example, food de-
privation establishes food as an effective reinforcer.
ethical codes of behavior Statements that provide guide-
lines for members of professional associations when de-
ciding a course of action or conducting professional
duties; standards by which graduated sanctions (e.g., rep-
rimand, censure, expulsion) can be imposed for deviating
from the code.
ethics Behaviors, practices, and decisions that address such
basic and fundamental questions as: What is the right thing
to do? What's worth doing? What does it mean to be a
good behavior analytic practitioner?
event recording Measurement procedure for obtaining a tally
or count of the number of times a behavior occurs.
evocative effect (of a motivating operation) An increase in
the current frequency of behavior that has been reinforced
by the stimulus that is increased in reinforcing effective-
ness by the same motivating operation. For example, food
deprivation evokes (increases the current frequency of) be-
havior that has been reinforced by food.
exact count-per-interval 1OA The percentage of total in-
tervals in which two observers recorded the same count;
the most stringent description of 10A for most data sets ob-
tained by event recording.
exclusion time-out A procedure for implementing time-out
in which, contingent on the occurrence of a target behav-
ior, the person is removed physically from the current en-
vironment for a specified period.
experiment A carefully controlled comparison of some mea-
sure of the phenomenon of interest (the dependent vari-
able) under two or more different conditions in which only
one factor at a time (the independent variable) differs from
one condition to another.
experimental analysis of behavior (EAB) A natural science
approach to the study of behavior as a subject matter in
its own right founded by B. F. Skinner; methodological
features include rate of response as a basic dependent vari-
able, repeated or continuous measurement of clearly de-
fined response classes, within-subject experimental
comparisons instead of group design, visual analysis of
graphed data instead of statistical inference, and an em-
phasis on describing functional relations between behav-
ior and controlling variables in the environment over
formal theory testing.
experimental control Two meanings: (a) the outcome of an
experiment that demonstrates convincingly a functional
relation, meaning that experimental control is achieved
when a predictable change in behavior (the dependent
variable) can be reliably produced by manipulating a spe-
cific aspect of the environment (the independent variable);
and (b) the extent to which a researcher maintains precise
control of the independent variable by presenting it, with-
drawing it, and/or varying its value, and also by eliminat-
ing or holding constant all confounding and extraneous
variables. (See confounding variable, extraneous vari-
able, and independent variable.)
experimental design The particular type and sequence of
conditions in a study so that meaningful comparisons of
the effects of the presence and absence (or different values)
of the independent variable can be made.
experimental question A statement of what the researcher
seeks to learn by conducting the experiment; may be pre-
sented in question form and is most often found in a pub-
lished account as a statement of the experiment's purpose.
All aspects of an experiment's design should follow from the
experimental question (also called the research question).
explanatory fiction A fictitious or hypothetical variable that
often takes the form of another name for the observed phe-
nomenon it claims to explain and contributes nothing to a
functional account or understanding of the phenomenon,
such as "intelligence" or "cognitive awareness" as expla-
nations for why an organism pushes the lever when the
light is on and food is available but does not push the lever
when the light is off and no food is available.
external validity The degree to which a study's findings have
generality to other subjects, settings, and/or behaviors.
(Compare to internal validity.)
extinction (operant) The discontinuing of a reinforcement of
a previously reinforced behavior (i.e., responses no longer
produce reinforcement); the primary effect is a decrease in
the frequency of the behavior until it reaches a prereinforced
level or ultimately ceases to occur. (See extinction burst,
spontaneous recovery; compare respondent extinction)
extinction burst An increase in the frequency of responding
when an extinction procedure is initially implemented
extraneous variable Any aspect of the experimental setting
(e.g., lighting, temperature) that must be held constant to
prevent unplanned environmental variation.
fading A procedure for transferring stimulus control in
which features of an antecedent stimulus (e.g., shape,
size, position, color) controlling a behavior are gradu-
ally changed to a new stimulus while maintaining the
current behavior; stimulus features can be faded in (en-
hanced) or faded out (reduced).
feature stimulus class Stimuli that share common physical
forms or structures (e.g., made from wood, four legs,
round, blue) or common relative relationships (e.g., bigger
than, hotter than, higher than, next to). (Compare to
arbitrary stimulus class.)
fixed interval (FI) A schedule of reinforcement in which re-
inforcement is delivered for the first response emitted fol-
lowing the passage of a fixed duration of time since the
last response was reinforced (e.g., on an Fl 3-minute
schedule, the first response following the passage of 3 min-
utes is reinforced).
fixed-interval DRO (FI-DRO) A DRO procedure in which
reinforcement is available at the end of intervals of fixed
duration and delivered contingent on the absence of the
problem behavior during each interval. (See differential
reinforcement of other behavior (DRO).)
fixed-momentary DRO (FM-DRO) A DRO procedure in
which reinforcement is available at specific moments of
time, which are separated by a fixed amount of time, and
delivered contingent on the problem not occurring at those
moments. (See differential reinforcement of other be-
havior (DRO).)
fixed ratio (FR) A schedule of reinforcement requiring a
fixed number of responses for reinforcement (e.g., an FR
4 schedule reinforcement follows every fourth response).
fixed-time schedule (FT) A schedule for the delivery of non-
contingent stimuli in which a time interval remains the
same from one delivery to the next.
formal similarity A situation that occurs when the control-
ling antecedent stimulus and the response or response
product (a) share the same sense mode (e.g., both stimu-
lus and response are visual, auditory, or tactile) and (b)
physically resemble each other. The verbal relations with
formal similarity are echoic, coping a text, and imitation
as it relates to sign language.
forward chaining A method for teaching behavior chains
that begins with the learner being prompted and taught to
perform the first behavior in the task analysis; the trainer
completes the remaining steps in the chain. When the
learner shows competence in performing the first step in
the chain, he is then taught to perform the first two be-
haviors in the chain, with the training completing the chain.
This process is continued until the learner completes the
entire chain independently.
free operant Any operant behavior that results in minimal
displacement of the participant in time and space. A free
operant can be emitted at nearly any time; it is discrete, it
requires minimal time for completion, and it can produce
a wide range of response rates. Examples in ABA include
(a) the number of words read during a 1-minute counting
period, (b) the number of hand slaps per 6 seconds, and
(c) the number of letter strokes written in 3 minutes. (Con-
trast with discrete trial.)
free-operant avoidance A contingency in which responses
at any time during an interval prior to the scheduled onset
of an aversive stimulus delays the presentation of the aver-
sive stimulus. (Contrast with discriminated avoidance.)
frequency A ratio of count per observation time; often ex-
pressed as count per standard unit of time (e.g., per minute,
per hour, per day) and calculated by dividing the number
of responses recorded by the number of standard units of
time in which observations were conducted; used inter-
changeably with rate.
full-session DRL A procedure for implementing DRL in
which reinforcement is delivered at the end of the session
if the total number of responses emitted during the ses-
sion does not exceed a criterion limit. (See differential
reinforcement of low rates (DRL).)
function-altering effect (relevant to operant relations) A
relatively permanent change in an organism's repertoire
of MO, stimulus, and response relations, caused by re-
inforcement, punishment, an extinction procedure, or
a recovery from punishment procedure. Respondent
function-altering effects result from the pairing and un-
pairing of antecedent stimuli
function-based definition Designates responses as members
of the targeted response class solely in terms of their com-
mon effect on the environment.
functional analysis (as part of functional behavior assess-
ment) An analysis of the purposes (functions) of prob-
lem behavior, wherein antecedents and consequences
representing those in the person's natural routines are
arranged within an experimental design so that their sep-
arate effects on problem behavior can be observed and
measured; typically consists of four conditions: three test
conditions— contingent attention, contingent escape, and
alone—and a control condition in which problem behav-
ior is expected to be low because reinforcement is freely
available and no demands are placed on the person.
functional behavior assessment (FBA) A systematic method
of assessment for obtaining information about the pur-
poses (functions) a problem behavior serves for a person;
results are used to guide the design of an intervention for
decreasing the problem behavior and increasing appro-
priate behavior.
functional communication training (FCT) An antecedent in-
tervention in which an appropriate communicative behavior
is taught as a replacement behavior for problem behavior
usually evoked by an establishing operation (EO); involves
differential reinforcement of alternative behavior (DRA).
functional relation A verbal statement summarizing the re-
sults of an experiment (or group of related experiments)
that describes the occurrence of the phenomena under
study as a function of the operation of one or more spec-
ified and controlled variables in the experiment in which
a specific change in one event (the dependent variable)
can be produced by manipulating another event (the inde-
pendent variable), and that the change in the dependent
variable was unlikely the result of other factors (con-
founding variables); in behavior analysis expressed as
b =f(xl), (x2), . .., where b is the behavior and x1, 12.
etc., are environmental variables of which the behavior is
a function.
functionally equivalent Serving the same function or pur-
pose; different topographies of behavior are functionally
equivalent if they produce the same consequences.
general case analysis A systematic process for identifying
and selecting teaching examples that represent the full
range of stimulus variations and response requirements in
the generalization setting(s). (See also multiple exemplar
training and teaching sufficient examples.)
generalization A generic term for a variety of behavioral
processes and behavior change outcomes. (See general-
ization gradient, generalized behavior change, response
generalization, response maintenance, setting/situation
generalization, and stimulus generalization.)
generalization across subjects Changes in the behavior of
people not directly treated by an intervention as a func-
tion of treatment contingencies applied to other people.
generalization probe Any measurement of a learner's per-
formance of a target behavior in a setting and/or stimulus
situation in which direct training has not been provided.
generalization setting Any place or stimulus situation that
differs in some meaningful way from the instructional set-
ting and in which performance of the target behavior is
desired. (Contrast with instructional setting.)
generalized behavior change A behavior change that has not
been taught directly. Generalized outcomes take one, or a
combination of, three primary forms: response maintenance,
stimulus/setting generalization, and response generaliza-
tion. Sometimes called generalized outcome.
generalized conditioned punisher A stimulus change that,
as a result of having been paired with many other punish-
ers, functions as punishment under most conditions be-
cause it is free from the control of motivating conditions
for specific types of punishment.
generalized conditioned reinforcer A conditioned reinforcer
that as a result of having been paired with many other re-
inforcers does not depend on an establishing operation for
any particular form of reinforcement for its effectiveness.
generic (tact) extension A tact evoked by a novel stimulus
that shares all of the relevant or defining features associ-
ated with the original stimulus.
graph A visual format for displaying data; reveals relations
among and between a series of measurements and rele-
vant variables.
group contingency A contingency in which reinforcement
for all members of a group is dependent on the behavior
of (a) a person within the group, (b) a select group of mem-
bers within the larger group, or (c) each member of the
group meeting a performance criterion. (See dependent
group contingency, independent group contingency,
interdependent group contingency.)
habilitation Habilitation (adjustment) occurs when a per-
son's repertoire has been changed such that short- and
long-term reinforcers are maximized and short- and long-
term punishers are minimized.
habit reversal A multiple-component treatment package for
reducing unwanted habits such as fingernail biting and
muscle tics; treatment typically includes self-awareness
training involving response detection and procedures for
identifying events that precede and trigger the response;
competing response training; and motivation techniques
including self-administered consequences, social support
systems, and procedures for promoting the generalization
and maintenance of treatment gains.
habituation A decrease in responsiveness to repeated pre-
sentations of a stimulus; most often used to describe a re-
duction of respondent behavior as a function of repeated
presentation of the eliciting stimulus over a short span of
time; some researchers suggest that the concept also ap-
plies to within-session changes in operant behavior.
hallway time-out A procedure for implementing time-out in
which, contingent on the occurrence of an inappropriate
behavior, the student is removed from the classroom to a
hallway location near the room for a specified period of
time.
hero procedure Another term for a dependent group contin-
gency (i.e., a person earns a reward for the group).
high-probability (high-p) request sequence An antecedent
intervention in which two to five easy tasks with a known
history of learner compliance (the high-p requests) are
presented in quick succession immediately before re-
questing the target task, the low-p request. Also called int-
erspersed requests, pretask requests, or behavioral
momentum.
higher order conditioning Development of a conditioned
reflex by pairing of a neutral stimulus (NS) with a condi-
tioned stimulus (CS). Also called secondary conditioning.
history of reinforcement An inclusive term referring in gen-
eral to all of a person's learning experiences and more
specifically to past conditioning with respect to particular
response classes or aspects of a person's repertoire. (See
ontogeny.)
hypothetical construct A presumed but unobserved process
or entity (e.g., Freud's id, ego, and superego).
imitation A behavior controlled by any physical movement
that serves as a novel model excluding vocal-verbal be-
havior, has formal similarity with the model, and imme-
diately follows the occurrence of the model (e.g., within
seconds of the model presentation). An imitative behavior
is a new behavior emitted following a novel antecedent
event (i.e., the model). (See formal similarity; contrast
with echoic.)
impure tact A verbal operant involving a response that is
evoked by both an MO and a nonverbal stimulus; thus, the
response is part mand and part tact. (See mand and tact.)
independent group contingency A contingency in which
reinforcement for each member of a group is dependent on
that person's meeting a performance criterion that is in ef-
fect for all members of the group.
independent variable The variable that is systematically ma-
nipulated by the researcher in an experiment to see whether
changes in the independent variable produce reliable changes
in the dependent variable. In applied behavior analysis, it is
usually an environmental event or condition antecedent or
consequent to the dependent variable. Sometimes called
the intervention or treatment variable. (Compare with
dependent variable.)
indirect functional assessment Structured interviews, check-
lists, rating scales, or questionnaires used to obtain infor-
mation from people who are familiar with the person
exhibiting the problem behavior (e.g., teachers, parents,
caregivers, and/or the individual him- or herself); used to
identify conditions or events in the natural environment
that correlate with the problem behavior.
indirect measurement Occurs when the behavior that is
measured is in some way different from the behavior of
interest; considered less valid than direct measurement be-
cause inferences about the relation between the data ob-
tained and the actual behavior of interest are required.
(Contrast with direct measurement.)
indiscriminable contingency A contingency that makes it
difficult for the learner to discriminate whether the next
response will produce reinforcement. Practitioners use in-
discriminable contingencies in the form of intermittent
schedules of reinforcement and delayed rewards to pro-
mote generalized behavior change.
informed consent When the potential recipient of services or
participant in a research study gives his explicit permission
before any assessment or treatment is provided. Full dis-
closure of effects and side effects must be provided. To
give consent, the person must (a) demonstrate the capac-
ity to decide, (b) do so voluntarily, and (c) have adequate
knowledge of all salient aspects of the treatment.
instructional setting The environment where instruction oc-
curs; includes all aspects of the environment, planned and
unplanned, that may influence the learner's acquisition
and generalization of the target behavior. (Contrast with
generalization setting.)
interdependent group contingency A contingency in which
reinforcement for all members of a group is dependent on
each member of the group meeting a performance criterion
that is in effect for all members of the group.
intermittent schedule of reinforcement (INT) A contin-
gency of reinforcement in which some, but not all, occur-
rences of the behavior produce reinforcement.
internal validity The extent to which an experiment shows
convincingly that changes in behavior are a function of
the independent variable and not the result of uncontrolled
or unknown variables. (Compare to external validity.)
interobserver agreement (IOA) The degree to which two
or more independent observers report the same observed
values after measuring the same events.
interresponse time (IRT) A measure of temporal locus;
defined as the elapsed time between two successive
responses.
interval-by-interval IOA An index of the agreement be-
tween observers for data obtained by interval recording or
time sampling measurement; calculated for a given ses-
sion or measurement period by comparing the two ob-
servers' recordings of the occurrence or nonoccurrence of
the behavior in each observation interval and dividing the
number of intervals of agreement by the total number of
intervals and multiplying by 100. Also called the point-
by-point or total interval IOA. (Compare to scored-interval
IOA and unscored-interval 1OA.)
interval DRL A procedure for implementing DRL in which
the total session is divided into equal intervals and rein-
forcement is provided at the end of each interval in which
the number of responses during the interval is equal to or
below a criterion limit. (See differential reinforcement of
low rates (DRL).)
intraverbal An elementary verbal operant that is evoked by
a verbal discriminative stimulus and that does not have
point-to-point correspondence with that verbal stimulus.
irreversibility A situation that occurs when the level of re-
sponding observed in a previous phase cannot be repro-
duced even though the experimental conditions are the
same as they were during the earlier phase.
lag reinforcement schedule A schedule of reinforcement in
which reinforcement is contingent on a response being
different in some specified way (e.g., different topogra-
phy) from the previous response (e.g., Lag 1) or a speci-
fied number of previous responses (e.g., Lag 2 or more).
latency See response latency.
level The value on the vertical axis around which a series of
behavioral measures converge.
level system A component of some token economy systems
in which participants advance up (or down) through a suc-
cession of levels contingent on their behavior at the cur-
rent level. The performance criteria and sophistication or
difliculty of the behaviors required at each level are higher
than those of preceding levels; as participants advance to
higher levels, they gain access to more desirable rein-
forcers, increased privileges, and greater independence.
limited hold A situation in which reinforcement is available
only during a finite time following the elapse of an FI or
VI interval; if the target response does not occur within
the time limit, reinforcement is withheld and a new inter-
val begins (e.g., on an FI 5-minute schedule with a limited
hold of 30 seconds, the first correct response following
the elapse of 5 minutes is reinforced only if that response
occurs within 30 seconds after the end of the 5-minute
interval).
line graph Based on a Cartesian plane, a two-dimensional
area formed by the intersection of two perpendicular lines.
Any point within the plane represents a specific relation
between the two dimensions described by the intersecting
lines. It is the most common graphic format for displaying
data in applied behavior analysis.
listener Someone who provides reinforcement for verbal be-
havior. A listener may also serve as an audience evoking
verbal behavior. (Contrast with speaker.)
local response rate The average rate of response during a
smaller period of time within a larger period for which an
overall response rate has been given. (See overall re-
sponse rate.)
magnitude The force or intensity with which a response is
emitted; provides important quantitative parameters used
in defining and verifying the occurrence of some response
classes. Responses meeting those criteria are measured
and reported by one or more fundamental or derivative
measures such as frequency, duration, or latency. Some-
times called amplitude.
maintenance Two different meanings in applied behavior
analysis: (a) the extent to which the learner continues to
perform the target behavior after a portion or all of the
intervention has been terminated (i.e., response mainte-
nance), a dependent variable or characteristic of behavior;
and (b) a condition in which treatment has been discon-
tinued or partially withdrawn, an independent variable or
experimental condition.
mand An elementary verbal operant that is evoked by an MO
and followed by specific reinforcement.
massed practice A self-directed behavior change technique
in which the person forces himself to perform an unde-
sired behavior (e.g., a compulsive ritual) repeatedly, which
sometimes decreases the future frequency of the behavior.
matching law The allocation of responses to choices avail-
able on concurrent schedules of reinforcement; rates of
responding across choices are distributed in proportions
that match the rates of reinforcement received from each
choice alternative.
matching-to-sample A procedure for investigating condi-
tional relations and stimulus equivalence. A matching-to-
sample trial begins with the participant making a response
that presents or reveals the sample stimulus; next, the sam-
ple stimulus may or may not be removed, and two or more
comparison stimuli are presented. The participant then se-
lects one of the comparison stimuli. Responses that select
a comparison stimulus that matches the sample stimulus
are reinforced, and no reinforcement is provided for re-
sponses selecting the nonmatching comparison stimuli.
mean count-per-interval 1O The average percentage of
agreement between the counts reported by two observers
in a measurement period comprised of a series of smaller
counting times; a more conservative measure of IOA than
total count IOA.
mean duration-per-occurrence IOA An IOA index for du-
ration per occurrence data; also a more conservative and
usually more meaningful assessment of 10A for total du-
ration data calculated for a given session or measurement
period by computing the average percentage of agreement
of the durations reported by two observers for each oc-
currence of the target behavior.
measurement bias Nonrandom measurement error; a form of
inaccurate measurement in which the data consistently
overestimate or underestimate the true value of an event.
measurement by permanent product A method of mea-
suring behavior after it has occurred by recording the ef-
fects that the behavior produced on the environment.
mentalism An approach to explaining behavior that assumes
that a mental, or "inner," dimension exists that differs from
a behavioral dimension and that phenomena in this di-
mension either directly cause or at least mediate some
forms of behavior, if not all.
metaphorical (tact) extension A tact evoked by a novel stim-
ulus that shares some, but not all, of the relevant features
of the original stimulus.
methodological behaviorism A philosophical position that
views behavioral events that cannot be publicly observed
as outside the realm of science.
metonymical (tact) extension A tact evoked by a novel stim-
ulus that shares none of the relevant features of the origi-
nal stimulus configuration, but some irrelevant yet related
feature has acquired stimulus control.
mixed schedule (mix) A compound schedule of reinforce-
ment consisting of two or more basic schedules of rein-
forcement (elements) that occur in an alternating, usually
random, sequence; no discriminative stimuli are correlated
with the presence or absence of each element of the sched-
ule, and reinforcement is delivered for meeting the re-
sponse requirements of the element in effect at any time.
momentary time sampling A measurement method in which
the presence or absence of behaviors are recorded at pre-
cisely specified time intervals. (Contrast with interval
recording.)
motivating operation (MO) An environmental variable that
(a) alters (increases or decreases) the reinforcing or pun-
ishing effectiveness of some stimulus, object, or event; and
(b) alters (increases or decreases) the current frequency of
all behavior that has been reinforced or punished by that
stimulus, object, or event. (See abative effect, abolishing
operation (AO), behavior-altering effect, evocative ef-
fect, establishing operation (EO), value-altering effect.)
multielement design See alternating treatments design.
multiple baseline across behaviors design A multiple base-
line design in which the treatment variable is applied to
two or more different behaviors of the same subject in the
same setting.
multiple baseline across settings design A multiple base-
line design in which the treatment variable is applied to
the same behavior of the same subject across two or more
different settings, situations, or time periods.
multiple baseline across subjects design A multiple base-
line design in which the treatment variable is applied to
the same behavior of two or more subjects (or groups) in
the same setting.
multiple baseline design An experimental design that begins
with the concurrent measurement of two or more behaviors
in a baseline condition, followed by the application of the
treatment variable to one of the behaviors while baseline
conditions remain in effect for the other behavior(s). After
maximum change has been noted in the first behavior, the
treatment variable is applied in sequential fashion to each of
the other behaviors in the design. Experimental control is
demonstrated if each behavior shows similar changes when,
and only when, the treatment variable is introduced.
multiple control (of verbal behavior) There are two types
of multiple control: (a) convergent multiple control occurs
when a single verbal response is a function of more than
one variable and (b) what is said has more than one an-
tecedent source of control. Divergent multiple control oc-
curs when a single antecedent variable affects the strength
of more than one responses.
multiple exemplar training Instruction that provides the
learner with practice with a variety of stimulus conditions,
response variations, and response topographies to ensure
the acquisition of desired stimulus controls response
forms; used to promote both setting/situation generaliza-
tion and response generalization. (See teaching sufficient
examples.)
multiple probe design A variation of the multiple baseline
design that features intermittent measures, or probes, dur-
ing baseline. It is used to evaluate the effects of instruction
on skill sequences in which it is unlikely that the subject
can improve performance on later steps in the sequence
before learning prior steps.
multiple schedule (mult) A compound schedule of rein-
forcement consisting of two or more basic schedules of re-
inforcement (elements) that occur in an alternating,
usually random, sequence; a discriminative stimulus is
correlated with the presence or absence of each element
of the schedule, and reinforcement is delivered for meet-
ing the response requirements of the element in effect at
any time.
multiple treatment interference The effects of one treatment
on a subject's behavior being confounding by the influence
of another treatment administered in the same study.
multiple treatment reversal design Any experimental de-
sign that uses the experimental methods and logic of the
reversal tactic to compare the effects of two or more ex-
perimental conditions to baseline and/or to one another
(e.g., A-B-A-B-C-B-C, A-B-A-C-A-D-A-C-A-D, A-B-A-
B-B+C-B-B+C).
naive observer An observer who is unaware of the study's pur-
pose and/or the experimental conditions in effect during a
given phase or observation period. Data obtained by a naive
observer are less likely to be influenced by observers'
expectations.
naturally existing contingency Any contingency of rein-
forcement (or punishment) that operates independent of
the behavior analyst's or practitioner's efforts; includes
socially mediated contingencies contrived by other peo-
ple and already in effect in the relevant setting. (Contrast
with contrived contingency.)
negative punishment A response behavior is followed im-
mediately by the removal of a stimulus (or a decrease in
the intensity of the stimulus), that decreases the future fre-
quency of similar responses under similar conditions;
sometimes called Type Il punishment. (Contrast with
positive punishment.)
negative reinforcer A stimulus whose termination (or re-
duction in intensity) functions as reinforcement. (Contrast
with positive reinforcer.)
neutral stimulus (NS) A stimulus change that does not elicit
respondent behavior. (Compare to conditioned stimulus
(CS), unconditioned stimulus (US).)
noncontingent reinforcement (NCR) A procedure in which
stimuli with known reinforcing properties are presented
on fixed-time (FT) or variable-time (VT) schedules com-
pletely independent of behavior; often used as an an-
tecedent intervention to reduce problem behavior. (See
fixed-time schedule (F'T), variable-time schedule (VT).)
noncontingent reinforcement (NCR) reversal technique
An experimental control technique that demonstrates the
effects of reinforcement by using noncontingent rein-
forcement (NCR) as a control condition instead of a no-
reinforcement (baseline) condition. During the NCR
condition, the stimulus change used as reinforcement in
the reinforcement condition is presented on a fixed or vari-
able time schedule independent of the subject's behavior.
A higher level of responding during the reinforcement con-
dition than during the NCR condition demonstrates that
the changes in behavior are the result of contingent rein-
forcement, not simply the presentation of or contact with
the stimulus event. (Compare with DRI/DRA reversal
technique, DRO reversal technique.)
nonexclusion time-out A procedure for implementing time-
out in which, contingent on the occurrence of the target
behavior, the person remains within the setting, but does
not have access to reinforcement, for a specified period.
normalization As a philosophy and principle, the belief that
people with disabilities should, to the maximum extent pos-
sible, be physically and socially integrated into the main-
stream of society regardless of the degree or type of
disability. As an approach to intervention, the use of pro-
gressively more typical settings and procedures "to estab-
lish and/or maintain personal behaviors which are as
culturally normal as possible" (Wolfensberger, 1972, p. 28).
observed value A measure produced by an observation and
measurement system. Observed values serve as the data
that the researcher and others will interpret to form con-
clusions about an investigation. (Compare with true value.)
observer drift Any unintended change in the way an ob-
server uses a measurement system over the course of an in-
vestigation that results in measurement error; often entails
a shift in the observer's interpretation of the original def-
initions of the target behavior subsequent to being trained.
(See measurement bias, observer reactivity.)
observer reactivity Influence on the data reported by an
observer that results from the observer's awareness that
others are evaluating the data he reports. (See also meas-
urement bias and observer drift.)
ontogeny The history of the development of an individual
organism during its lifetime. (See history of reinforce-
ment; compare to phylogeny.)
operant behavior Behavior that is selected, maintained, and
brought under stimulus control as a function of its conse-
quences; each person's repertoire of operant behavior is a
product of his history of interactions with the environment
(ontogeny).
operant conditioning The basic process by which operant
learning occurs; consequences (stimulus changes imme-
diately following responses) result in an increased (rein-
forcement) or decreased (punishment) frequency of the
same type of behavior under similar motivational and
environmental conditions in the future. (See motivating
operation, punishment, reinforcement, response class,
stimulus control.)
overall response rate The rate of response over a given time
period. (See local response rate.)
overcorrection A behavior change tactic based on positive
punishment in which, contingent on the problem behavior,
the learner is required to engage in effortful behavior di-
rectly or logically related to fixing the damage caused by
the behavior. Forms of overcorrection are restitutional
overcorrection and positive practice overcorrection. (See
positive practice overcorrection, restitutional over-
correction.)
parametric analysis An experiment designed to discover the
differential effects of a range of values of an independent
variable.
parsimony The practice of ruling out simple, logical expla-
nations, experimentally or conceptually, before consider-
ing more complex or abstract explanations.
partial-interval recording A time sampling method for mea-
suring behavior in which the observation period is divided
into a series of brief time intervals (typically from 5 to 10
seconds). The observer records whether the target behavior
occurred at any time during the interval. Partial-interval
recording is not concerned with how many times the be-
havior occurred during the interval or how long the behav-
ior was present, just that it occurred at some point during the
interval; tends to overestimate the proportion of the obser-
vation period that the behavior actually occurred.
partition time-out An exclusion procedure for implement-
ing time-out in which, contingent on the occurrence of the
target behavior, the person remains within the time-in set-
ting, but stays behind a wall, shield, or barrier that restricts
the view.
percentage A ratio (i.e., a proportion) formed by combining
the same dimensional quantities, such as count (number ÷
number) or time (duration ÷ duration; latency ÷ latency);
expressed as a number of parts per 100; typically expressed
as a ratio of the number of responses of a certain type per
total number of responses (or opportunities or intervals in
which such a response could have occurred). A percentage
presents a proportional quantity per 100.
philosophic doubt An attitude that the truthfulness and va-
lidity of all scientific theory and knowledge should be con-
tinually questioned.
phylogeny The history of the natural evolution of a species.
(Compare to ontogeny.)
pivotal behavior A behavior that, when learned, produces
corresponding modifications or covariation in other un-
trained behaviors. (Compare to behavioral cusp.)
placebo control A procedure that prevents a subject from
detecting the presence or absence of the treatment vari-
able. To the subject the placebo condition appears the
same as the treatment condition (e.g., a placebo pill con-
tains an inert substance but looks, feels, and tastes exactly
like a pill that contains the treatment drug). (See double-
blind control.)
planned activity check (PLACHECK) A variation of mo-
mentary time sampling in which the observer records
whether each person in a group is engaged in the target
behavior at specific points in time; provides a measure of
"group behavior."
planned ignoring A procedure for implementing time-out
in which social reinforcers-usually attention, physical
contact, and verbal interaction—are withheld for a brief
period contingent on the occurrence of the target behavior.
point-to-point correspondence A relation between the stim-
ulus and response or response product that occurs when the
beginning, middle, and end of the verbal stimulus matches
the beginning, middle, and end of the verbal response. The
verbal relations with point-to-point correspondence are
echoic, copying a text, imitation as it relates to sign lan-
guage, textual, and transcription.
positive practice overcorrection A form of overcorrection in
which, contingent on an occurrence of the target behavior,
the learner is required to repeated a correct form of the be-
havior, or a behavior incompatible with the problem be-
havior, a specified number of times; entails an educative
component. (See overcorrection, restitutional overcor-
rection.)
positive punishment A behavior is followed immediately by
the presentation of a stimulus that decreases the future fre-
quency of the behavior; sometimes called Type I punish-
ment. (Contrast with negative punishment.)
positive reinforcement Occurs when a behavior is followed
immediately by the presentation of a stimulus that in-
creases the future frequency of the behavior in similar con-
ditions (Contrast to negative reinforcement.)
positive reinforcer A stimulus whose presentation or onset
functions as reinforcement. (Contrast with negative rein-
forcer.)
postreinforcement pause The absence of responding for a
period of time following reinforcement; an effect com-
monly produced by fixed interval (FI) and fixed ratio (FR)
schedules of reinforcement.
practice effects Improvements in performance resulting from
opportunities to perform a behavior repeatedly so that
baseline measures can be obtained.
prediction A statement of the anticipated outcome of a
presently unknown or future measurement; one of three
components of the experimental reasoning, or baseline
logic, used in single-subject research designs. (See repli-
cation, verification.)
Premack principle A principle that states that making the
opportunity to engage in a high-probability behavior
contingent on the occurrence of a low-frequency behavior
will function as reinforcement for the low-frequency be-
havior. (See also response-deprivation hypothesis.)
principle of behavior A statement describing a functional re-
lation between behavior and one or more of its controlling
variables with generality across organisms, species, set-
tings, behaviors, and time (e.g., extinction, positive rein-
forcement); an empirical generalization inferred from
many experiments demonstrating the same functional
relation
procedural fidelity See treatment integrity.
programming common stimuli A tactic for promoting set-
ting/situation generalization by making the instructional
setting similar to the generalization setting; the two-step
process involves (1) identifying salient stimuli that char-
acterize the generalization setting and (2) incorporating
those stimuli into the instructional setting.
progressive schedule of reinforcement A schedule that sys-
tematically thins each successive reinforcement opportu-
nity independent of the individual's behavior; progressive
ratio (PR) and progressive interval (PI) schedules are
thinned using arithmetic or geometric progressions.
punisher A stimulus change that decreases the future fre-
quency of behavior that immediately precedes it. (See
aversive stimulus, conditioned punisher, unconditioned
punisher.)
punishment Occurs when stimulus change immediately fol-
lows a response and decreases the future frequency of that
type of behavior in similar conditions. (See negative pun-
ishment, positive punishment.)
radical behaviorism A thoroughgoing form of behaviorism
that attempts to understand all human behavior, including
private events such as thoughts and feelings, in terms of
controlling variables in the history of the person (on-
togeny) and the species (phylogeny).
rate A ratio of count per observation time; often expressed as
count per standard unit of time (e.g., per minute, per hour,
per day) and calculated by dividing the number of re-
sponses recorded by the number of standard units of time
in which observations were conducted; used interchange-
ably with frequency. The ratio is formed by combining the
different dimensional quantities of count and time (i.e.,
count time). Ratios formed from different dimensional
quantities retain their dimensional quantities. Rate and
frequency in behavioral measurement are synonymous
terms. (Contrast with percentage.)
ratio strain A behavioral effect associated with abrupt in-
creases in ratio requirements when moving from denser
to thinner reinforcement schedules; common effects in-
clude avoidance, aggression, and unpredictable pauses or
cessation in responding.
reactivity Effects of an observation and measurement pro-
cedure on the behavior being measured. Reactivity is most
likely when measurement procedures are obtrusive, espe-
cially if the person being observed is aware of the ob-
server's presence and purpose.
recovery from punishment procedure The occurrence of a
previously punished type of response without its punish-
ing consequence. This procedure is analogous to the ex-
tinction of previously reinforced behavior and has the
effect of undoing the effect of the punishment.
reflex A stimulus-response relation consisting of an antecedent
stimulus and the respondent behavior it elicits (e.g., bright
light-pupil contraction). Unconditioned and conditioned re-
flexes protect against harmful stimuli, help regulate the in-
ternal balance and economy of the organism, and promote
reproduction. (See conditioned reflex, respondent be-
havior, respondent conditioning, unconditioned reflex.)
reflexive conditioned motivating operation (CMO-R) A
stimulus that acquires MO effectiveness by preceding some
form of worsening or improvement. It is exemplified by
the warning stimulus in a typical escape-avoidance proce-
dure, which establishes its own offset as reinforcement and
evokes all behavior that has accomplished that offset.
reflexivity A type of stimulus-to-stimulus relation in which
the learner, without any prior training or reinforcement for
doing so, selects a comparison stimulus that is the same as
the sample stimulus (e.g., A = A). Reflexivity would be
demonstrated in the following matching-to-sample proce-
dure: The sample stimulus is a picture of a tree, and the
three comparison stimuli are a picture of a mouse, a pic-
ture of a cookie, and a duplicate of the tree picture used as
the sample stimulus. The learner selects the picture of the
tree without specific reinforcement in the past for making
the tree-picture-to-tree-picture match. (It is also called
generalized identity matching.) (See stimulus equiva-
lence; compare to transitivity, symmetry.)
reinforcement Occurs when a stimulus change immediately
follows a response and increases the future frequency of
that type of behavior in similar conditions. (See negative
reinforcement, positive reinforcement.)
reinforcer A stimulus change that increases the future fre-
quency of behavior that immediately precedes it. (See
conditioned reinforcer, unconditioned reinforcer.)
reinforcer-abolishing effect (of a motivating operation) A
decrease in the reinforcing effectiveness of a stimulus, ob-
ject, or event caused by a motivating operation. For ex-
ample, food ingestion abolishes (decreases) the reinforcing
effectiveness of food.
reinforcer assessment Refers to a variety of direct, empiri-
cal methods for presenting one or more stimuli contingent
on a target response and measuring their effectiveness as
reinforcers.
reinforcer-establishing effect (of a motivating operation)
An increase in the reinforcing effectiveness of a stimulus,
object, or event caused by a motivating operation. For ex-
ample, food deprivation establishes (increases) the rein-
forcing effectiveness of food.
relevance of behavior rule Holds that only behaviors likely
to produce reinforcement in the person's natural environ-
ment should be targeted for change.
reliability (of measurement) Refers to the consistency of
measurement, specifically, the extent to which repeated
measurement of the same event yields the same values.
repeatability Refers to the fact that a behavior can occur re-
peatedly through time (i.e., behavior can be counted); one
of the three dimensional quantities of behavior from which
all behavioral measurements are derived. (See count, fire-
quency, rate, celeration, temporal extent, and temporal
locus.)
repertoire All of the behaviors a person can do; or a set of
behaviors relevant to a particular setting or task (e.g., gar-
dening, mathematical problem solving).
replication (a) Repeating conditions within an experiment
to determine the reliability of effects and increase internal
validity. (See baseline logic, prediction, verification.)
(b) Repeating whole experiments to determine the gener-
ality of findings of previous experiments to other subjects,
settings, and/or behaviors. (See direct replication, ex-
ternal validity, systematic replication.)
resistance to extinction The relative frequency with which
operant behavior is emitted during extinction.
respondent behavior The response component of a reflex;
behavior that is elicited, or induced, by antecedent stimuli.
(See reflex, respondent conditioning.)
respondent conditioning A stimulus-stimulus pairing pro-
cedure in which a neutral stimulus (NS) is presented with
an unconditioned stimulus (US) until the neutral stimulus
becomes a conditioned stimulus that elicits the conditioned
response (also called classical or Pavlovian conditioning).
(See conditioned reflex, higher order conditioning.)
respondent extinction The repeated presentation of a con-
ditioned stimulus (CS) in the absence of the unconditioned
stimulus (US); the CS gradually loses its ability to elicit the
conditioned response until the conditioned reflex no longer
appears in the individual's repertoire.
response A single instance or occurrence of a specific class
or type of behavior. Technical definition: an "action of an
organism's effector. An effector is an organ at the end of an
efferent nerve fiber that is specialized for altering its envi-
ronment mechanically, chemically, or in terms of other en-
ergy changes" (Michael, 2004, p. 8). (See response class.)
response blocking A procedure in which the therapist phys-
ically intervenes as soon as the learner begins to emit a
problem behavior to prevent completion of the targeted
behavior.
response class A group of responses of varying topography,
all of which produce the same effect on the environment.
response cost The contingent loss of reinforcers (e.g., a fine),
producing a decrease of the frequency of behavior; a form
of negative punishment.
response-deprivation hypothesis A model for predicting
whether contingent access to one behavior will function as
reinforcement for engaging in another behavior based on
whether access to the contingent behavior represents a re-
striction of the activity compared to the baseline level of
engagement. (See Premack principle.)
response differentiation A behavior change produced by
differential reinforcement: Reinforced members of the
current response class occur with greater frequency, and
unreinforced members occur less frequently (undergo ex-
tinction); the overall result is the emergence of a new re-
sponse class.
response generalization The extent to which a learner emits
untrained responses that are functionally equivalent to the
trained target behavior. (Compare to response mainte-
nance and setting/situation generalization.)
response latency A measure of temporal locus; the elapsed
time from the onset of a stimulus (e.g., task direction, cue)
to the initiation of a response.
response maintenance The extent to which a learner con-
tinues to perform the target behavior after a portion or all
of the intervention responsible for the behavior's initial
appearance in the learner's repertoire has been terminated.
Often called maintenance, durability, behavioral persis-
tence, and (incorrectly) resistance to extinction. (Com-
pare to response generalization and setting/situation
generalization.)
restitutional overcorrection A form of overcorrection in
which, contingent on the problem behavior, the learner is
required to repair the damage or return the environment
to its original state and then to engage in additional
behavior to bring the environment to a condition vastly
better than it was in prior to the misbehavior. (See
overcorrection and positive practice overcorrection.)
reversal design Any experimental design in which the re-
searcher attempts to verify the effect of the independent
variable by "reversing" responding to a level obtained in
a previous condition; encompasses experimental designs
in which the independent variable is withdrawn (A-B-
A-B) or reversed in its focus (e.g., DRI/DRA). (See A-B-A
design, A-B-A-B design, B-A-B, DRI/DRA reversal
technique, DRO reversal technique, noncontingent re-
inforcement (NCR) reversal technique.)
rule-governed behavior Behavior controlled by a rule (i.e.,
a verbal statement of an antecedent-behavior-consequence
contingency); enables human behavior (e.g., fastening a
seatbelt) to come under the indirect control of temporally
remote or improbable but potentially significant conse-
quences (e.g., avoiding injury in an auto accident). Often
used in contrast to contingency-shaped behavior, a term
used to indicate behavior selected and maintained by con-
trolled, temporally close consequences.
satiation A decrease in the frequency of operant behavior
presumed to be the result of continued contact with or con-
sumption of a reinforcer that has followed the behavior;
also refers to a procedure for reducing the effectiveness
of a reinforcer (e.g., presenting a person with copious
amounts of a reinforcing stimulus prior to a session). (See
motivating operation; contrast with deprivation.)
scatterplot A two-dimensional graph that shows the relative
distribution of individual measures in a data set with re-
spect to the variables depicted by the x and y axes. Data
points on a scatterplot are not connected
schedule of reinforcement A rule specifying the environ-
mental arrangements and response requirements for rein-
forcement; a description of a contingency of reinforcement.
schedule thinning Changing a contingency of reinforcement
by gradually increasing the response ratio or the extent of
the time interval; it results in a lower rate of reinforcement
per responses, time, or both.
science A systematic approach to the understanding of nat-
ural phenomena (as evidenced by description, prediction,
and control) that relies on determinism as its fundamental
assumption, empiricism as its primary rule, experimenta-
tion as its basic strategy, replication as a requirement for
believability, parsimony as a value, and philosophic doubt
as its guiding conscience.
scored-interval 10A An interobserver agreement index
based only on the intervals in which either observer
recorded the occurrence of the behavior; calculated by di-
viding the number of intervals in which the two observers
agreed that the behavior occurred by the number of inter-
vals in which either or both observers recorded the occur-
rence of the behavior and multiplying by 100.
Scored-interval IOA is recommended as a measure of
agreement for behaviors that occur at low rates because it
ignores the intervals in which agreement by chance is
highly likely. (Compare to interval-by-interval 10A and
unscored-interval IOA.)
selection by consequences The fundamental principle un-
derlying operant conditioning; the basic tenet is that all
forms of (operant) behavior, from simple to complex, are
selected, shaped, and maintained by their consequences
during an individual's lifetime; Skinner's concept of se-
lection by consequences is parallel to Darwin's concept
of natural selection of genetic structures in the evolution
of species.
self-contract Contingency contract that a person makes with
himself, incorporating a self-selected task and reward as
well as personal monitoring of task completions and self-
delivery of the reward
self-control Two meanings: (a) A person's ability to "delay
gratification" by emitting a response that will produce a
larger (or higher quality) delayed reward over a response
that produces a smaller but immediate reward (sometimes
considered impulse control): (b) A person's behaving in a
certain way so as to change a subsequent behavior (i.e., to
self-manage her own behavior). Skinner (1953) concep-
tualized self-control as a two-response phenomenon: The
controlling response affects variables in such a way as to
change the probability of the controlled response. (See
self-management.)
self-evaluation A procedure in which a person compares his
performance of a target behavior with a predetermined
goal or standard; often a component of self-management.
Sometimes called self-assessment.
self-instruction Self-generated verbal responses, covert or
overt, that function as rules or response prompts for a desired
behavior; as a self-management tactic, self-instruction can
guide a person through a behavior chain or sequence of tasks.
self-management The personal application of behavior
change tactics that produces a desired change in behavior.
self-monitoring A procedure whereby a person systemati-
cally observes his behavior and records the occurrence or
nonoccurrence of a target behavior. (Also called self-
recording or self-observation.)
semilogarithmic chart A two-dimensional graph with a log-
arithmic scaled y axis so that equal distances on the verti-
cal axis represent changes in behavior that are of equal
proportion. (See Standard Celeration Chart.)
sensory extinction The process by which behaviors main-
tained by automatic reinforcement are placed on extinction
by masking or removing the sensory consequence.
sequence effects The effects on a subject's behavior in a
given condition that are the result of the subject's experi-
ence with a prior condition.
setting/situation generalization The extent to which a
learner emits the target behavior in a setting or stimulus sit-
uation that is different from the instructional setting.
shaping Using differential reinforcement to produce a series
of gradually changing response classes; each response
class is a successive approximation toward a terminal be-
havior. Members of an existing response class are selected
for differential reinforcement because they more closely
resemble the terminal behavior. (See differential rein-
forcement, response class, response differentiation,
successive approximations.)
single-subject designs A wide variety of research designs
that use a form of experimental reasoning called baseline
logic to demonstrate the effects of the independent variable
on the behavior of individual subjects. (Also called single-
case, within-subject, and intra-subject designs) (See also
alternating treatments design, baseline logic, changing
criterion design, multiple baseline design, reversal de-
sign, steady state strategy.)
social validity Refers to the extent to which target behaviors
are appropriate, intervention procedures are acceptable, and
important and significant changes in target and collateral be-
haviors are produced.
solistic (tact) extension A verbal response evoked by a stim-
ulus property that is only indirectly related to the proper
tact relation (e.g., Yogi Berra's classic malapropism:
"Baseball is ninety percent mental; the other half is
physical."
spaced-responding DRL A procedure for implementing
DRL in which reinforcement follows each occurrence of
the target behavior that is separated from the previous re-
sponse by a minimum interresponse time (IRT). (See diff-
erential reinforcement of low rates (DRL).)
speaker Someone who engages in verbal behavior by emit-
ting mands, tacts, intraverbals, autoclitics, and so on. A
speaker is also someone who uses sign language, gestures,
signals, written words, codes, pictures, or any form of ver-
bal behavior. (Contrast with listener.)
split-middle line of progress A line drawn through a series
of graphed data points that shows the overall trend in the
data; drawn through the intersections of the vertical and
horizontal middles of each half of the charted data and
then adjusted up or down so that half of all the data points
fall on or above and half fall on or below the line.
spontaneous recovery A behavioral effect associated with
extinction in which the behavior suddenly begins to occur
after its frequency has decreased to its prereinforcement
level or stopped entirely.
stable baseline Data that show no evidence of an upward or
downward trend; all of the measures fall within a relatively
small range of values. (See steady state responding.)
Standard Celeration Chart A multiply-divide chart with
six base-10 (or x10, ÷ 10) cycles on the vertical axis that
can accommodate response rates as low as 1 per 24 hours
(0.000695 per minute) to as high as 1,000 per minute. It
enables the standardized charting of celeration, a factor
by which rate of behavior multiplies or divides per unit of
time. (See semilogarithmic chart.)
steady state responding A pattern of responding that ex-
hibits relatively little variation in its measured dimensional
quantities over a period of time.
steady state strategy Repeatedly exposing a subject to a
given condition while trying to eliminate or control extra-
neous influences on the behavior and obtaining a stable
pattern of responding before introducing the next condi-
tion.
stimulus "An energy change that affects an organism through
its receptor cells" (Michael, 2004, p. 7).
stimulus class A group of stimuli that share specified com-
mon elements along formal (e.g., size, color), temporal
(e.g., antecedent or consequent), and/or functional (e.g.,
discriminative stimulus) dimensions.
stimulus control A situation in which the frequency, latency,
duration, or amplitude of a behavior is altered by the pres-
ence or absence of an antecedent stimulus. (See discrimi-
nation, discriminative stimulus.)
stimulus delta (S*) A stimulus in the presence of which a
given behavior has not produced reinforcement in the past.
(Contrast with discriminative stimulus (S").)
stimulus discrimination training The conventional proce-
dure requires one behavior and two antecedent stimulus
conditions. Responses are reinforced in the presence of
one stimulus condition, the S' , but not in the presence of
the other stimulus, the S4
stimulus equivalence The emergence of accurate responding
to untrained and nonreinforced stimulus-stimulus rela-
tions following the reinforcement of responses to some
stimulus-stimulus relations. A positive demonstration of
reflexivity, symmetry, and transitivity is necessary to meet
the definition of equivalence.
stimulus generalization When an antecedent stimulus has
a history of evoking a response that has been reinforced in
its presence, the same type of behavior tends to be evoked
by stimuli that share similar physical properties with the
controlling antecedent stimulus.
stimulus generalization gradient A graphic depiction of the
extent to which behavior that has been reinforced in the
presence of a specific stimulus condition is emitted in
the presence of other stimuli. The gradient shows relative
degree of stimulus generalization and stimulus control (or
discrimination). A flat slope across test stimuli shows a
high degree of stimulus generalization and relatively little
discrimination between the trained stimulus and other
stimuli; a slope that drops sharply from its highest point
corresponding to the trained stimulus indicates a high de-
gree of stimulus control (discrimination) and relatively lit-
tle stimulus generalization.
stimulus preference assessment A variety of procedures
used to determine the stimuli that a person prefers, the rel-
ative preference values (high versus low) of those stimuli,
the conditions under which those preference values remain
in effect, and their presumed value as reinforcers.
stimulus-stimulus pairing A procedure in which two stim-
uli are presented at the same time, usually repeatedly for
a number of trials, which often results in one stimulus ac-
quiring the function of the other stimulus.
successive approximations The sequence of new response
classes that emerge during the shaping process as the re-
sult of differential reinforcement; each successive response
class is closer in form to the terminal behavior than the
response class it replaces.
surrogate conditioned motivating operation (CMO-S) A
stimulus that acquires its MO effectiveness by being paired
with another MO and has the same value-altering and
behavior-altering effects as the MO with which it was
paired
symmetry A type of stimulus-to-stimulus relationship in which
the learner, without prior training or reinforcement for doing
so, demonstrates the reversibility of matched sample and
comparison stimuli (e.g., if A = B, then B = A). Symmetry
would be demonstrated in the following matching-to-sample
procedure: The learner is taught, when presented with the
spoken word car (sample stimulus A), to select a compari-
son picture of a car (comparison B). When presented with the
picture of a car (sample stimulus B), without additional train-
ing or reinforcement, the learner selects the comparison spo-
ken word car (comparison A). (See stimulus equivalence;
compare to reflexivity, transitivity.)
systematic desensitization A behavior therapy treatment for
anxieties, fears, and phobias that involves substituting one
response, generally muscle relaxation, for the unwanted
behavior-the fear and anxiety. The client practices re-
laxing while imagining anxiety-producing situations in a
sequence from the least fearful to the most fearful.
systematic replication An experiment in which the re-
searcher purposefully varies one or more aspects of an ear-
lier experiment. A systematic replication that reproduces
the results of previous research not only demonstrates the
reliability of the earlier findings but also adds to the ex-
ternal validity of the earlier findings by showing that the
same effect can be obtained under different conditions.
tact An elementary verbal operant evoked by a nonverbal
discriminative stimulus and followed by generalized con-
ditioned reinforcement.
tandem schedule A schedule of reinforcement identical to
the chained schedule except, like the mix schedule, the
tandem schedule does not use discriminative stimuli with
the elements in the chain. (See chained schedule, mixed
schedule.)
target behavior The response class selected for intervention;
can be defined either functionally or topographically.
task analysis The process of breaking a complex skill or se-
ries of behaviors into smaller, teachable units; also refers
to the results of this process.
teaching loosely Randomly varying functionally irrelevant
stimuli within and across teaching sessions; promotes set-
ting/situation generalization by reducing the likelihood
that (a) a single or small group of noncritical stimuli will
acquire exclusive control over the target behavior and
(2) the learner's performance of the target behavior will
be impeded or "thrown off" should he encounter any of
the "loose" stimuli in the generalization setting.
teaching sufficient examples A strategy for promoting gen-
eralized behavior change that consists of teaching the
learner to respond to a subset of all of the relevant stimu-
lus and response examples and then assessing the learner's
performance on untrained examples. (See multiple ex-
emplar training.)
temporal extent Refers to the fact that every instance of be-
havior occurs during some amount of time; one of the three
dimensional quantities of behavior from which all behav-
ioral measurements are derived. (See repeatability and
temporal locus.)
temporal locus Refers to the fact that every instance of be-
havior occurs at a certain point in time with respect to other
events (i.e., when in time behavior occurs can be mea-
sured); often measured in terms of response latency and
interresponse time (IRT); one of the three dimensional
quantities of behavior from which all behavioral measure-
ments are derived. (See repeatability, temporal extent.)
terminal behavior The end product of shaping.
textual An elementary verbal operant involving a response
that is evoked by a verbal discriminative stimulus that has
point-to-point correspondence, but not formal similarity,
between the stimulus and the response product.
three-term contingency The basic unit of analysis in the
analysis of operant behavior; encompasses the temporal
and possibly dependent relations among an antecedent
stimulus, behavior, and consequence.
time-out from positive reinforcement The contingent with-
drawal of the opportunity to earn positive reinforcement or
the loss of access to positive reinforcers for a specified
time; a form of negative punishment (also called time-out).
time-out ribbon A procedure for implementing nonexclu-
sion time-out in which a child wears a ribbon or wristband
that becomes discriminative for receiving reinforcement.
Contingent on misbehavior, the ribbon is removed and ac-
cess to social and other reinforcers are unavailable for a
specific period. When time-out ends, the ribbon or band is
returned to the child and time-in begins.
time sampling A measurement of the presence or absence
of behavior within specific time intervals. It is most use-
ful with continuous and high-rate behaviors. (See
momentary time sampling, partial-interval recording,
and whole-interval recording.)
token An object that is awarded contingent on appropriate
behavior and that serves as the medium of exchange for
backup reinforcers.
token economy A system whereby participants earn gener-
alized conditioned reinforcers (e.g., tokens, chips, points)
as an immediate consequence for specific behaviors; par-
ticipants accumulate tokens and exchange them for items
and activities from a menu of backup reinforcers. (See
generalized conditioned reinforcer.)
topography The physical form or shape of a behavior.
topography-based definition Defines instances of the tar-
geted response class by the shape or form of the behavior.
total count IOA The simplest indicator of 10A for event
recording data; based on comparing the total count
recorded by each observer per measurement period; cal-
culated by dividing the smaller of the two observers'
counts by the larger count and multiplying by 100.
total duration IOA A relevant index of IOA for total dura-
tion measurement; computed by dividing the shorter of
the two durations reported by the observers by the longer
duration and multiplying by 100.
total-task chaining A variation of forward chaining in which
the learner receives training on each behavior in the chain
during each session.
transcription An elementary verbal operant involving a
spoken verbal stimulus that evokes a written, typed, or fin-
ger-spelled response. Like the textual, there is point-to-
point correspondence between the stimulus and the
response product, but no formal similarity.
transitive conditioned motivating operation (CMO-T) An
environmental variable that, as a result of a learning
history, establishes (or abolishes) the reinforcing effec-
tiveness of another stimulus and evokes (or abates) the be-
havior that has been reinforced by that other stimulus.
transitivity A derived (i.e., untrained) stimulus-stimulus re-
lation (e,g., A = C, C = A) that emerges as a product of
training two other stimulus-stimulus relations (e.g., A =
B and B = C). For example, transitivity would be demon-
strated if, after training the two stimulus-stimulus rela-
tions shown in 1 and 2 below, the relation shown in
3 emerges without additional instruction or reinforcement:
(1) If A (e.g., spoken word bicycle) = B (e.g., the picture
of a bicycle) (see Figure 3), and
(2) B (the picture of a bicycle) = C (e.g., the written word
bicycle) (see Figure 4), then
(3) C (the written word bicycle) = A (the spoken name,
bicycle) (see Figure 5). (See stimulus equivalence;
compare to reflexivity, symmetry.)
treatment drift An undesirable situation in which the inde-
pendent variable of an experiment is applied differently
during later stages than it was at the outset of the study.
treatment integrity The extent to which the independent
variable is applied exactly as planned and described and no
other unplanned variables are administered inadvertently
along with the planned treatment. Also called procedural
fidelity.
trend The overall direction taken by a data path. It is de-
scribed in terms of direction (increasing, decreasing, or
zero trend), degree (gradual or steep), and the extent of
variability of data points around the trend. Trend is used
in predicting future measures of the behavior under un-
changing conditions.
trial-by-trial 10A An 10A index for discrete trial data based
on comparing the observers' counts (0 or 1) on a trial-by-
trial, or item-by-item, basis; yields a more conservative
and meaningful index of IOA for discrete trial data than
does total count IOA.
trials-to-criterion A special form of event recording; a mea-
sure of the number of responses or practice opportunities
needed for a person to achieve a preestablished level of
accuracy or proficiency.
true value A measure accepted as a quantitative description
of the true state of some dimensional quantity of an event
as it exists in nature. Obtaining true values requires spe-
cial or extraordinary precautions to ensure that all possi-
ble sources of error have been avoided or removed" (John-
ston & Pennypacker, 1993a, p. 136). (Compare with
observed value.)
Type I error An error that occurs when a researcher con-
cludes that the independent variable had an effect on the
dependent variable, when no such relation exists; a false
positive. (Contrast with Type Il error.)
Type Il error An error that occurs when a researcher con-
cludes that the independent variable had no effect on the
dependent variable, when in truth it did; a false negative.
(Contrast with Type I error.)
unconditioned motivating operation (UMO) A motivating
operation whose value-altering effect does not depend on
a learning history. For example, food deprivation increases
the reinforcing effectiveness of food without the necessity
of any learning history.
unconditioned negative reinforcer A stimulus that func-
tions as a negative reinforcer as a result of the evolution-
ary development of the species (phylogeny); no prior
learning is involved (e.g., shock, loud noise, intense light,
extreme temperatures, strong pressure against the body).
(See negative reinforcer; compare with conditioned neg-
ative reinforcer.)
unconditioned punisher A stimulus change that decreases
the frequency of any behavior that immediately precedes
it irrespective of the organism's learning history with the
stimulus. Unconditioned punishers are products of the evo-
lutionary development of the species (phylogeny), mean-
ing that all members of a species are more or less
susceptible to punishment by the presentation of uncon-
ditioned punishers (also called primary or unlearned pun-
ishers). (Compare with conditioned punisher.)
unconditioned reflex An unlearned stimulus-response func-
tional relation consisting of an antecedent stimulus (e.g.,
food in mouth) that elicits the response (e.g., salivation);
a product of the phylogenic evolution of a given species;
all biologically intact members of a species are born with
similar repertoires of unconditioned reflexes. (See con-
ditioned reflex.)
unconditioned reinforcer A stimulus change that increases
the frequency of any behavior that immediately precedes
it irrespective of the organism's learning history with the
stimulus. Unconditioned reinforcers are the product of the
evolutionary development of the species (phylogeny). Also
called primary or unlearned reinforcer. (Compare with
conditioned reinforcer:)
unconditioned stimulus (US) The stimulus component of
an unconditioned reflex; a stimulus change that elicits re-
spondent behavior without any prior learning.
unpairing Two kinds: (a) The occurrence alone of a stimu-
lus that acquired its function by being paired with an al-
ready effective stimulus, or (b) the occurrence of the
stimulus in the absence as well as in the presence of the ef-
fective stimulus. Both kinds of unpairing undo the result
of the pairing: the occurrence alone of the stimulus that
became a conditioned reinforcer; and the occurrence of
the unconditioned reinforcer in the absence as well as in
the presence of the conditioned reinforcer.
unscored-interval IOA An interobserver agreement index
based only on the intervals in which either observer
recorded the nonoccurrence of the behavior; calculated by
dividing the number of intervals in which the two ob-
servers agreed that the behavior did not occur by the num-
ber of intervals in which either or both observers recorded
the nonoccurrence of the behavior and multiplying by 100.
Unscored-interval IOA is recommended as a measure of
agreement for behaviors that occur at high rates because
it ignores the intervals in which agreement by chance is
highly likely. (Compare to interval-by-interval 10A,
scored-interval IOA.)
validity (of measurement) The extent to which data obtained
from measurement are directly relevant to the target be-
havior of interest and to the reason(s) for measuring it.
value-altering effect (of a motivating operation) An alter-
ation in the reinforcing effectiveness of a stimulus, object,
or event as a result of a motivating operation. For exam-
ple, the reinforcing effectiveness of food is altered as a re-
sult of food deprivation and food ingestion.
variability The frequency and extent to which multiple mea-
sures of behavior yield different outcomes.
variable baseline Data points that do not consistently fall
within a narrow range of values and do not suggest any
clear trend
variable interval (VI) A schedule of reinforcement that pro-
vides reinforcement for the first correct response follow-
ing the elapse of variable durations of time occurring in a
random or unpredictable order. The mean duration of the
intervals is used to describe the schedule (e.g., on a VI 10-
minute schedule, reinforcement is delivered for the first
response following an average of 10 minutes since the last
reinforced response, but the time that elapses following
the last reinforced response might range from 30 seconds
or less to 25 minutes or more).
variable-interval DRO (VI-DRO) A DRO procedure in
which reinforcement is available at the end of intervals of
variable duration and delivered contingent on the absence
of the problem behavior during the interval. (See differ-
ential reinforcement of other behavior (DRO).)
variable-momentary DRO (VM-DRO) A DRO procedure
in which reinforcement is available at specific moments
of time, which are separated by variable amounts of time
in random sequence, and delivered if the problem is not oc-
curring at those times. (See differential reinforcement
of other behavior (DRO).)
variable ratio (VR) A schedule of reinforcement requiring
a varying number of responses for reinforcement. The
number of responses required varies around a random
number; the mean number of responses required for rein-
forcement is used to describe the schedule (e.g., on a VR
10 schedule an average of 10 responses must be emitted for
reinforcement, but the number of responses required fol-
lowing the last reinforced response might range from 1 to
30 or more).
variable-time schedule (VT) A schedule for the delivery of
noncontingent stimuli in which the interval of time from
one delivery to the next randomly varies around a given
time. For example, on a VT 1-minute schedule, the delivery-
to-delivery interval might range from 5 seconds to 2 min-
utes, but the average interval would be 1 minute.
verbal behavior Behavior whose reinforcement is mediated
by a listener; includes both vocal-verbal behavior (e.g.,
saying "Water, please" to get water) and nonvocal-verbal
behavior (pointing to a glass of water to get water). En-
compasses the subject matter usually treated as language
and topics such as thinking, grammar, composition, and
understanding.
verification One of three components of the experimental
reasoning, or baseline logic, used in single-subject research
designs; accomplished by demonstrating that the prior
level of baseline responding would have remained un-
changed had the independent variable not been introduced.
Verifying the accuracy of the original prediction reduces
the probability that some uncontrolled (confounding) vari-
able was responsible for the observed change in behavior.
(See prediction, replication.)
visual analysis A systematic approach for interpreting the
results of behavioral research and treatment programs
that entails visual inspection of graphed data for vari-
ability, level, and trend within and between experimental
conditions.
whole-interval recording A time sampling method for mea-
suring behavior in which the observation period is divided
into a series of brief time intervals (typically from 5 to 15
seconds). At the end of each interval, the observer records
whether the target behavior occurred throughout the entire
interval; tends to underestimate the proportion of the ob-
servation period that many behaviors actually occurred.
withdrawal design A term used by some authors as a syn-
onym for A-B-A-B design; also used to describe experi-
ments in which an effective treatment is sequentially or
partially withdrawn to promote the maintenance of behav-
ior changes. (See A-B-A-B design, reversal design.)